Praise for	Praise for	Похвала за	Praise for
Listening When Parts Speak	Listening When Parts Speak	Слушать, когда говорят части	Listening When Parts Speak
“Tamala’s personal examples are compelling and courageous, and the case studies perfectly illustrate the concepts. People will be able to do considerable work on themselves by trying the exercises, and many IFS therapists will assign this book to clients as an adjunct to the therapy.”	“Tamala’s personal examples are compelling and courageous, and the case studies perfectly illustrate the concepts. People will be able to do considerable work on themselves by trying the exercises, and many IFS therapists will assign this book to clients as an adjunct to the therapy.”	«Личные примеры Тамалы убедительны и смелы, а тематические исследования прекрасно иллюстрируют эту концепцию. Люди смогут проделать значительную работу над собой, попробовав упражнения, и многие терапевты IFS будут давать эту книгу клиентам в качестве дополнения к терапии».	“Tamala’s personal examples are compelling and courageous, and the case studies perfectly illustrate the concepts. People will be able to do considerable work on themselves by trying the exercises, and many IFS therapists will assign this book to clients as an adjunct to the therapy.”
— from the foreword by Richard C. Schwartz, Ph.D., founder of Internal Family Systems Therapy	— from the foreword by Richard C. Schwartz, Ph.D., founder of Internal Family Systems Therapy	- из предисловия Ричарда К. Шварца, доктора философии, основателя внутренней семейной системной терапии.	— from the foreword by Richard C. Schwartz, Ph.D., founder of Internal Family Systems Therapy
“Listening When Parts Speak is an ancestral playbook for unlocking the heart of your wounds and the embodied power of your healing. With beautiful vulnerability and potency, Tamala Floyd offers rich medicine that can only be consumed when a person is genuinely ready and willing to be with the dark fears in the corners of their mind and release the terrorizing burdens in the belly of their pain. For those who are ready, I urge you to let Tamala be your unflinching guide on this journey called healing.”	“Listening When Parts Speak is an ancestral playbook for unlocking the heart of your wounds and the embodied power of your healing. With beautiful vulnerability and potency, Tamala Floyd offers rich medicine that can only be consumed when a person is genuinely ready and willing to be with the dark fears in the corners of their mind and release the terrorizing burdens in the belly of their pain. For those who are ready, I urge you to let Tamala be your unflinching guide on this journey called healing.”	«Слушать, когда говорят части» — это древняя книга, помогающая раскрыть суть ваших ран и воплощенную силу вашего исцеления. Обладая прекрасной уязвимостью и силой, Тамала Флойд предлагает богатое лекарство, которое можно употреблять только тогда, когда человек искренне готов и желает покончить с темными страхами в уголках своего разума и освободить ужасающее бремя боли в животе. Тех, кто готов, я призываю позволить Тамале стать вашим непоколебимым проводником в этом путешествии, называемом исцелением».	“Listening When Parts Speak is an ancestral playbook for unlocking the heart of your wounds and the embodied power of your healing. With beautiful vulnerability and potency, Tamala Floyd offers rich medicine that can only be consumed when a person is genuinely ready and willing to be with the dark fears in the corners of their mind and release the terrorizing burdens in the belly of their pain. For those who are ready, I urge you to let Tamala be your unflinching guide on this journey called healing.”
— Jamari Michael White, ancestral medicine practitioner	— Jamari Michael White, ancestral medicine practitioner	— Джамари Майкл Уайт, специалист по народной медицине.	— Jamari Michael White, ancestral medicine practitioner
“I would like to thank Tamala Floyd’s ancestors for inspiring and guiding her to write this book. As a teacher for over 30 years and an IFS trainer for 20 years, I am extremely impressed with the pedagogy illustrated by Tamala’s writing. Her clarity in teaching—first through authentic personal story, followed by theory, case example, meditation, and journal prompts, and finishing with suggestions for anchoring the learning—was nothing short of brilliant. A must-read for all those wanting to enhance their IFS experience and deepen their relationship with ancestors.”	“I would like to thank Tamala Floyd’s ancestors for inspiring and guiding her to write this book. As a teacher for over 30 years and an IFS trainer for 20 years, I am extremely impressed with the pedagogy illustrated by Tamala’s writing. Her clarity in teaching—first through authentic personal story, followed by theory, case example, meditation, and journal prompts, and finishing with suggestions for anchoring the learning—was nothing short of brilliant. A must-read for all those wanting to enhance their IFS experience and deepen their relationship with ancestors.”	«Я хотел бы поблагодарить предков Тамалы Флойд за то, что они вдохновили и направили ее на написание этой книги. Как учитель со стажем более 30 лет и тренер IFS в течение 20 лет, я чрезвычайно впечатлен педагогикой, иллюстрированной произведениями Тамалы. Ее ясность в преподавании – сначала через подлинную личную историю, за которой следовала теория, пример из практики, медитация и подсказки для дневника, а в завершение предложения по закреплению обучения – была просто блестящей. Обязательно к прочтению всем, кто хочет расширить свой опыт IFS и углубить свои отношения с предками».	“I would like to thank Tamala Floyd’s ancestors for inspiring and guiding her to write this book. As a teacher for over 30 years and an IFS trainer for 20 years, I am extremely impressed with the pedagogy illustrated by Tamala’s writing. Her clarity in teaching—first through authentic personal story, followed by theory, case example, meditation, and journal prompts, and finishing with suggestions for anchoring the learning—was nothing short of brilliant. A must-read for all those wanting to enhance their IFS experience and deepen their relationship with ancestors.”
— Ann L. Sinko, LMFT, senior IFS trainer	— Ann L. Sinko, LMFT, senior IFS trainer	— Энн Л. Синко, LMFT, старший тренер IFS	— Ann L. Sinko, LMFT, senior IFS trainer
“From the profound wisdom of the ancestors to the depths of our hearts and minds, Listening When Parts Speak is a beautiful blend of personal reflections, heartfelt meditations, and transformative insights. With loving ancestral guidance, Tamala invites readers on a journey of self-discovery and inner healing using the Internal Family Systems model. Listening When Parts Speak rises as essential reading for anyone seeking to explore their inner world and uncover the truest expression of themselves. Thank you, Ancestors! Thank you, Tamala!”	“From the profound wisdom of the ancestors to the depths of our hearts and minds, Listening When Parts Speak is a beautiful blend of personal reflections, heartfelt meditations, and transformative insights. With loving ancestral guidance, Tamala invites readers on a journey of self-discovery and inner healing using the Internal Family Systems model. Listening When Parts Speak rises as essential reading for anyone seeking to explore their inner world and uncover the truest expression of themselves. Thank you, Ancestors! Thank you, Tamala!”	«От глубокой мудрости предков до глубин наших сердец и разума «Слушать, когда говорят части» представляет собой прекрасное сочетание личных размышлений, сердечных медитаций и преобразующих идей. Под любящим руководством предков Тамала приглашает читателей в путешествие самопознания и внутреннего исцеления с использованием модели внутренних семейных систем. «Слушание, когда говорят части» становится незаменимым чтением для всех, кто стремится исследовать свой внутренний мир и раскрыть самое истинное выражение себя. Спасибо, Предки! Спасибо, Тамала!»	“From the profound wisdom of the ancestors to the depths of our hearts and minds, Listening When Parts Speak is a beautiful blend of personal reflections, heartfelt meditations, and transformative insights. With loving ancestral guidance, Tamala invites readers on a journey of self-discovery and inner healing using the Internal Family Systems model. Listening When Parts Speak rises as essential reading for anyone seeking to explore their inner world and uncover the truest expression of themselves. Thank you, Ancestors! Thank you, Tamala!”
— Crystal R. Jones, LCSW, Internal Family Systems Institute lead trainer and consultant and founder of Life Source Counseling Center, Inc.	— Crystal R. Jones, LCSW, Internal Family Systems Institute lead trainer and consultant and founder of Life Source Counseling Center, Inc.	— Кристал Р. Джонс, LCSW, ведущий тренер и консультант Института внутренних семейных систем и основатель Life Source Counseling Center, Inc.	— Crystal R. Jones, LCSW, Internal Family Systems Institute lead trainer and consultant and founder of Life Source Counseling Center, Inc.
“I highly recommend Listening When Parts Speak to everyone, regardless of your level of understanding of IFS and/or Ancestral Healing. Tamala introduces the reader to both modalities in a clear and understandable way. She then translates the teaching into meditations and exercises that support the reader applying the concepts to their own system. Tamala generously shares her personal journey with IFS and ancestor work in a moving and inspiring way. I encourage you all to read this powerful book and experiment with Tamala’s meditations and exercises. Listening When Parts Speak is an incredible tool that can impact our own internal exploration and our work with our clients.”	“I highly recommend Listening When Parts Speak to everyone, regardless of your level of understanding of IFS and/or Ancestral Healing. Tamala introduces the reader to both modalities in a clear and understandable way. She then translates the teaching into meditations and exercises that support the reader applying the concepts to their own system. Tamala generously shares her personal journey with IFS and ancestor work in a moving and inspiring way. I encourage you all to read this powerful book and experiment with Tamala’s meditations and exercises. Listening When Parts Speak is an incredible tool that can impact our own internal exploration and our work with our clients.”	«Я настоятельно рекомендую слушать, когда говорят части, всем, независимо от вашего уровня понимания IFS и/или исцеления предков. Тамала ясно и понятно знакомит читателя с обоими модальностями. Затем она переводит учение в медитации и упражнения, которые помогают читателю применять эти концепции в своей собственной системе. Тамала щедро делится своим личным опытом с IFS и работой предков трогательным и вдохновляющим образом. Я призываю вас всех прочитать эту мощную книгу и поэкспериментировать с медитациями и упражнениями Тамалы. «Слушать, когда говорят части» — это невероятный инструмент, который может повлиять на наше собственное внутреннее исследование и нашу работу с нашими клиентами».	“I highly recommend Listening When Parts Speak to everyone, regardless of your level of understanding of IFS and/or Ancestral Healing. Tamala introduces the reader to both modalities in a clear and understandable way. She then translates the teaching into meditations and exercises that support the reader applying the concepts to their own system. Tamala generously shares her personal journey with IFS and ancestor work in a moving and inspiring way. I encourage you all to read this powerful book and experiment with Tamala’s meditations and exercises. Listening When Parts Speak is an incredible tool that can impact our own internal exploration and our work with our clients.”
— Pamela K. Krause, LCSW, senior lead trainer for IFS-I	— Pamela K. Krause, LCSW, senior lead trainer for IFS-I	— Памела К. Краузе, LCSW, старший ведущий тренер IFS-I.	— Pamela K. Krause, LCSW, senior lead trainer for IFS-I
“In Listening When Parts Speak, Tamala’s expertise and profound commitment to Internal Family Systems shine through every page. She guides readers with an incredibly nurturing touch and a compassionate approach for anyone seeking to embark on or continue their path toward growth, self-respect, and self-fulfillment. Tamala has created a sanctuary within these pages letting readers know that not only do their feelings matter but they hold the key to deep healing. This book is a mastery of a holistic mind-and-soul approach; it can be a wonderful companion on the journey toward self-love as well as a fantastic guide on the inner workings of IFS.”	“In Listening When Parts Speak, Tamala’s expertise and profound commitment to Internal Family Systems shine through every page. She guides readers with an incredibly nurturing touch and a compassionate approach for anyone seeking to embark on or continue their path toward growth, self-respect, and self-fulfillment. Tamala has created a sanctuary within these pages letting readers know that not only do their feelings matter but they hold the key to deep healing. This book is a mastery of a holistic mind-and-soul approach; it can be a wonderful companion on the journey toward self-love as well as a fantastic guide on the inner workings of IFS.”	«В книге «Слушай, когда говорят части» опыт Тамалы и глубокая приверженность внутренним семейным системам проявляются на каждой странице. Она направляет читателей с невероятно заботливым подходом и сострадательным подходом ко всем, кто хочет вступить или продолжить свой путь к росту, самоуважению и самореализации. Тамала создала на этих страницах убежище, позволяющее читателям понять, что их чувства не только имеют значение, но и содержат ключ к глубокому исцелению. Эта книга представляет собой образец целостного подхода к разуму и душе; он может стать прекрасным спутником на пути к любви к себе, а также фантастическим руководством по внутренней работе IFS».	“In Listening When Parts Speak, Tamala’s expertise and profound commitment to Internal Family Systems shine through every page. She guides readers with an incredibly nurturing touch and a compassionate approach for anyone seeking to embark on or continue their path toward growth, self-respect, and self-fulfillment. Tamala has created a sanctuary within these pages letting readers know that not only do their feelings matter but they hold the key to deep healing. This book is a mastery of a holistic mind-and-soul approach; it can be a wonderful companion on the journey toward self-love as well as a fantastic guide on the inner workings of IFS.”
— Lorriane Anderson, spiritual teacher, author of the best-selling The Witch’s Apothecary, and co-author of the best-selling Seasons of the Witch oracle deck series	— Lorriane Anderson, spiritual teacher, author of the best-selling The Witch’s Apothecary, and co-author of the best-selling Seasons of the Witch oracle deck series	— Лорриан Андерсон, духовный учитель, автор бестселлера «Аптека ведьмы» и соавтор бестселлера серии колод оракулов «Времена года ведьмы».	— Lorriane Anderson, spiritual teacher, author of the best-selling The Witch’s Apothecary, and co-author of the best-selling Seasons of the Witch oracle deck series
“Tamala Floyd’s book deepens and expands our connection and understanding with ‘parts’ of ourselves through IFS and support from our ancestors, delicately peeling back the layers of life with clarity and wisdom through her personal stories. The book is filled with inspiring meditations of healing and journal exercises, uncovering the power of self-leadership. Tamala leads us in processing trauma and pain to get in touch with sources of strength, creativity, compassion, and connection to recognize our own true Spirit. You’ll come away with tools to navigate life with wisdom and intuition. A must-read for anyone seeking a holistic approach to healing and self-discovery.”	“Tamala Floyd’s book deepens and expands our connection and understanding with ‘parts’ of ourselves through IFS and support from our ancestors, delicately peeling back the layers of life with clarity and wisdom through her personal stories. The book is filled with inspiring meditations of healing and journal exercises, uncovering the power of self-leadership. Tamala leads us in processing trauma and pain to get in touch with sources of strength, creativity, compassion, and connection to recognize our own true Spirit. You’ll come away with tools to navigate life with wisdom and intuition. A must-read for anyone seeking a holistic approach to healing and self-discovery.”	«Книга Тамалы Флойд углубляет и расширяет нашу связь и понимание «частей» нас самих через IFS и поддержку наших предков, деликатно снимая слои жизни с ясностью и мудростью через ее личные истории. Книга наполнена вдохновляющими размышлениями об исцелении и дневниковыми упражнениями, раскрывающими силу самоуправления. Тамала помогает нам справиться с травмами и болью, чтобы соприкоснуться с источниками силы, творчества, сострадания и связи, чтобы осознать наш собственный истинный Дух. Вы получите инструменты, позволяющие ориентироваться в жизни с мудростью и интуицией. Обязательно к прочтению всем, кто ищет целостный подход к исцелению и самопознанию».	“Tamala Floyd’s book deepens and expands our connection and understanding with ‘parts’ of ourselves through IFS and support from our ancestors, delicately peeling back the layers of life with clarity and wisdom through her personal stories. The book is filled with inspiring meditations of healing and journal exercises, uncovering the power of self-leadership. Tamala leads us in processing trauma and pain to get in touch with sources of strength, creativity, compassion, and connection to recognize our own true Spirit. You’ll come away with tools to navigate life with wisdom and intuition. A must-read for anyone seeking a holistic approach to healing and self-discovery.”
— Jataunia Schweitzer, MMTCP, certified mindfulness meditation teacher	— Jataunia Schweitzer, MMTCP, certified mindfulness meditation teacher	— Джатауния Швейцер, MMTCP, сертифицированный преподаватель медитации осознанности.	— Jataunia Schweitzer, MMTCP, certified mindfulness meditation teacher
“It’s a privilege to recommend Listening When Parts Speak. Tamala, who has rich experience as a licensed clinical social worker and therapist, beautifully integrates the principles of Internal Family Systems Therapy with the wisdom of our ancestors. Using her extensive expertise and stories from her own healing journey, Tamala makes the exploration of complex therapeutic concepts approachable and deeply engaging. Tamala’s narratives, practical exercises, and meditations highlight the path of IFS and ancestral healing, making it accessible to all. Tamala’s ability to effectuate growth and understanding makes this a valuable resource for therapists, clients, and anyone dedicated to their personal discovery and healing path.”	“It’s a privilege to recommend Listening When Parts Speak. Tamala, who has rich experience as a licensed clinical social worker and therapist, beautifully integrates the principles of Internal Family Systems Therapy with the wisdom of our ancestors. Using her extensive expertise and stories from her own healing journey, Tamala makes the exploration of complex therapeutic concepts approachable and deeply engaging. Tamala’s narratives, practical exercises, and meditations highlight the path of IFS and ancestral healing, making it accessible to all. Tamala’s ability to effectuate growth and understanding makes this a valuable resource for therapists, clients, and anyone dedicated to their personal discovery and healing path.”	«Для меня большая честь рекомендовать «Слушать, когда говорят части». Тамала, имеющая богатый опыт работы лицензированным клиническим социальным работником и терапевтом, прекрасно сочетает принципы внутренней семейной системной терапии с мудростью наших предков. Используя свой обширный опыт и истории из своего собственного пути к исцелению, Тамала делает исследование сложных терапевтических концепций доступным и глубоко увлекательным. Рассказы Тамалы, практические упражнения и медитации освещают путь IFS и исцеления предков, делая его доступным для всех. Способность Тамалы способствовать росту и пониманию делает ее ценным ресурсом для терапевтов, клиентов и всех, кто посвятил себя своим личным открытиям и пути исцеления».	“It’s a privilege to recommend Listening When Parts Speak. Tamala, who has rich experience as a licensed clinical social worker and therapist, beautifully integrates the principles of Internal Family Systems Therapy with the wisdom of our ancestors. Using her extensive expertise and stories from her own healing journey, Tamala makes the exploration of complex therapeutic concepts approachable and deeply engaging. Tamala’s narratives, practical exercises, and meditations highlight the path of IFS and ancestral healing, making it accessible to all. Tamala’s ability to effectuate growth and understanding makes this a valuable resource for therapists, clients, and anyone dedicated to their personal discovery and healing path.”
— Lisa R. Savage, LCSW, and Kim L. Knight, LMHC, founders of Clinicians of Color, LLC	— Lisa R. Savage, LCSW, and Kim L. Knight, LMHC, founders of Clinicians of Color, LLC	— Лиза Р. Сэвидж, LCSW, и Ким Л. Найт, LMHC, основатели Clinicians of Color, LLC	— Lisa R. Savage, LCSW, and Kim L. Knight, LMHC, founders of Clinicians of Color, LLC
“Through ancestral wisdom, we are invited alongside Tamala as she befriends and heals parts of herself, teaching us IFS in the process. This book is unlike other IFS books out there—it offers refreshing guidance on healing intergenerational trauma with the support of our ancestors. Each meditation is a gift offering a chance of self-discovery and connection with our ancestors and with our parts. This is a joy to read and will inspire curiosity and provide healing for many generations to come.”	“Through ancestral wisdom, we are invited alongside Tamala as she befriends and heals parts of herself, teaching us IFS in the process. This book is unlike other IFS books out there—it offers refreshing guidance on healing intergenerational trauma with the support of our ancestors. Each meditation is a gift offering a chance of self-discovery and connection with our ancestors and with our parts. This is a joy to read and will inspire curiosity and provide healing for many generations to come.”	«Благодаря древней мудрости мы приглашены вместе с Тамалой, поскольку она дружит и исцеляет части себя, обучая нас IFS в процессе. Эта книга не похожа на другие книги IFS — она предлагает свежие рекомендации по исцелению травм, передаваемых из поколения в поколение, при поддержке наших предков. Каждая медитация — это дар, дающий шанс самопознания и связи с нашими предками и нашими частями тела. Читать это одно удовольствие, оно пробудит любопытство и принесет исцеление многим будущим поколениям».	“Through ancestral wisdom, we are invited alongside Tamala as she befriends and heals parts of herself, teaching us IFS in the process. This book is unlike other IFS books out there—it offers refreshing guidance on healing intergenerational trauma with the support of our ancestors. Each meditation is a gift offering a chance of self-discovery and connection with our ancestors and with our parts. This is a joy to read and will inspire curiosity and provide healing for many generations to come.”
— Daphne Fatter, Ph.D., certified IFS licensed psychologist, IFS clinical consultant, certified ancestral lineage healing practitioner	— Daphne Fatter, Ph.D., certified IFS licensed psychologist, IFS clinical consultant, certified ancestral lineage healing practitioner	— Дафна Фаттер, доктор философии, сертифицированный психолог, лицензированный IFS, клинический консультант IFS, сертифицированный практикующий целитель по линии предков.	— Daphne Fatter, Ph.D., certified IFS licensed psychologist, IFS clinical consultant, certified ancestral lineage healing practitioner
“Listen and heal! Tamala Floyd has created a gem that will help many people heal for years to come. Using her meditations, I was able to reach and identify deeply rooted trauma that had been suppressed for years. As a result, I’m on a healing journey and see myself in different ways. As I develop relationships with my Parts, giving them a voice and listening to what they have to say will allow me to clear paths and move forward. Listening When Parts Speak will become an essential resource in my life.”	“Listen and heal! Tamala Floyd has created a gem that will help many people heal for years to come. Using her meditations, I was able to reach and identify deeply rooted trauma that had been suppressed for years. As a result, I’m on a healing journey and see myself in different ways. As I develop relationships with my Parts, giving them a voice and listening to what they have to say will allow me to clear paths and move forward. Listening When Parts Speak will become an essential resource in my life.”	«Слушай и лечись! Тамала Флойд создала драгоценный камень, который поможет многим людям исцелиться на долгие годы. Используя ее медитации, я смог выявить и выявить глубоко укоренившуюся травму, которая подавлялась годами. В результате я нахожусь на пути к исцелению и вижу себя по-другому. По мере того, как я развиваю отношения со своими Частями, предоставление им права голоса и прислушивание к тому, что они говорят, позволит мне расчистить путь и двигаться вперед. Слушать, когда говорят части, станет важным ресурсом в моей жизни».	“Listen and heal! Tamala Floyd has created a gem that will help many people heal for years to come. Using her meditations, I was able to reach and identify deeply rooted trauma that had been suppressed for years. As a result, I’m on a healing journey and see myself in different ways. As I develop relationships with my Parts, giving them a voice and listening to what they have to say will allow me to clear paths and move forward. Listening When Parts Speak will become an essential resource in my life.”
— Theresa R. Glaspie, counseling client	— Theresa R. Glaspie, counseling client	— Тереза ​​Р. Глэспи, клиент-консультант	— Theresa R. Glaspie, counseling client
Copyright © 2024 by Tamala Floyd	Copyright © 2024 by Tamala Floyd	Авторские права © 2024 Тамала Флойд	Copyright © 2024 by Tamala Floyd
Published in the United States by: Hay House LLC: www.hayhouse.com® • Published in Australia by: Hay House Australia Pty Ltd: www.hayhouse.com.au • Published in the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.uk • Published in India by: Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.in	Published in the United States by: Hay House LLC: www.hayhouse.com® • Published in Australia by: Hay House Australia Pty Ltd: www.hayhouse.com.au • Published in the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.uk • Published in India by: Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.in	Опубликовано в США: Hay House LLC: www.hayhouse.com® • Опубликовано в Австралии: Hay House Australia Pty Ltd: www.hayhouse.com.au • Опубликовано в Великобритании: Hay House UK Ltd: www .hayhouse.co.uk • Издано в Индии: Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.in	Published in the United States by: Hay House LLC: www.hayhouse.com® • Published in Australia by: Hay House Australia Pty Ltd: www.hayhouse.com.au • Published in the United Kingdom by: Hay House UK Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.uk • Published in India by: Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd: www.hayhouse.co.in
Cover design: Kathleen Lynch	Cover design: Kathleen Lynch	Дизайн обложки: Кэтлин Линч.	Cover design: Kathleen Lynch
Interior design: Julie Davison	Interior design: Julie Davison	Дизайн интерьера: Джули Дэвисон	Interior design: Julie Davison
Indexer: Shapiro Indexing Services	Indexer: Shapiro Indexing Services	Индексатор: Службы индексирования Shapiro	Indexer: Shapiro Indexing Services
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or private use—other than for “fair use” as brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior written permission of the publisher.	All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or private use—other than for “fair use” as brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior written permission of the publisher.	Все права защищены. Никакая часть этой книги не может быть воспроизведена каким-либо механическим, фотографическим или электронным способом или в форме фонографической записи; его также нельзя хранить в поисковой системе, передавать или иным образом копировать для публичного или частного использования (за исключением «добросовестного использования» в виде кратких цитат, включенных в статьи и обзоры) без предварительного письменного разрешения издателя.	All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or in the form of a phonographic recording; nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or otherwise be copied for public or private use—other than for “fair use” as brief quotations embodied in articles and reviews—without prior written permission of the publisher.
The author of this book does not dispense medical advice or prescribe the use of any technique as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems without the advice of a physician, either directly or indirectly. The intent of the author is only to offer information of a general nature to help you in your quest for emotional, physical, and spiritual well-being. In the event you use any of the information in this book for yourself, the author and the publisher assume no responsibility for your actions.	The author of this book does not dispense medical advice or prescribe the use of any technique as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems without the advice of a physician, either directly or indirectly. The intent of the author is only to offer information of a general nature to help you in your quest for emotional, physical, and spiritual well-being. In the event you use any of the information in this book for yourself, the author and the publisher assume no responsibility for your actions.	Автор этой книги не дает медицинских советов и не предписывает использование каких-либо методов лечения физических, эмоциональных или медицинских проблем без консультации врача, прямой или косвенной. Намерение автора состоит только в том, чтобы предложить информацию общего характера, чтобы помочь вам в вашем стремлении к эмоциональному, физическому и духовному благополучию. Если вы используете какую-либо информацию из этой книги для себя, автор и издатель не несут ответственности за ваши действия.	The author of this book does not dispense medical advice or prescribe the use of any technique as a form of treatment for physical, emotional, or medical problems without the advice of a physician, either directly or indirectly. The intent of the author is only to offer information of a general nature to help you in your quest for emotional, physical, and spiritual well-being. In the event you use any of the information in this book for yourself, the author and the publisher assume no responsibility for your actions.
Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file at the Library of Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file at the Library of Congress	Данные каталогизации публикаций хранятся в Библиотеке Конгресса.	Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file at the Library of Congress
Tradepaper ISBN: 978-1-4019-7565-4	Tradepaper ISBN: 978-1-4019-7565-4	ISBN торговой бумаги: 978-1-4019-7565-4	Tradepaper ISBN: 978-1-4019-7565-4
E-book ISBN: 978-1-4019-7566-1	E-book ISBN: 978-1-4019-7566-1	ISBN электронной книги: 978-1-4019-7566-1.	E-book ISBN: 978-1-4019-7566-1
Audiobook ISBN: 978-1-4019-7567-8	Audiobook ISBN: 978-1-4019-7567-8	ISBN аудиокниги: 978-1-4019-7567-8.	Audiobook ISBN: 978-1-4019-7567-8
To the wise and intuitive women of my mother’s mother’s line, especially Marva L. Collins Bush (my mom).	To the wise and intuitive women of my mother’s mother’s line, especially Marva L. Collins Bush (my mom).	Мудрым и интуитивным женщинам по материнской линии моей матери, особенно Марве Л. Коллинз Буш (моей маме).	To the wise and intuitive women of my mother’s mother’s line, especially Marva L. Collins Bush (my mom).
Contents	Contents	Содержание	Contents
Foreword	Foreword	Предисловие	Foreword
CHAPTER 1: The Ancestors and Internal Family Systems Therapy	CHAPTER 1: The Ancestors and Internal Family Systems Therapy	ГЛАВА 1: Предки и внутрисемейная системная терапия	CHAPTER 1: The Ancestors and Internal Family Systems Therapy
CHAPTER 2: Connecting Inside: Meeting Your Parts	CHAPTER 2: Connecting Inside: Meeting Your Parts	ГЛАВА 2: Внутреннее соединение: встреча ваших частей	CHAPTER 2: Connecting Inside: Meeting Your Parts
CHAPTER 3: The Meadow: Young and Vulnerable Parts	CHAPTER 3: The Meadow: Young and Vulnerable Parts	ГЛАВА 3: Луг: молодые и уязвимые части	CHAPTER 3: The Meadow: Young and Vulnerable Parts
CHAPTER 4: Self Qualities: The You That’s Not a Part	CHAPTER 4: Self Qualities: The You That’s Not a Part	ГЛАВА 4: Внутренние качества: ты, который не является частью	CHAPTER 4: Self Qualities: The You That’s Not a Part
CHAPTER 5: Be With: Encouraging Parts to Separate from You	CHAPTER 5: Be With: Encouraging Parts to Separate from You	ГЛАВА 5: Быть рядом: побуждать части отделяться от вас	CHAPTER 5: Be With: Encouraging Parts to Separate from You
CHAPTER 6: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors: Building Relationships with Your Parts	CHAPTER 6: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors: Building Relationships with Your Parts	ГЛАВА 6: Кристальная пещера с предками: построение отношений со своими частями	CHAPTER 6: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors: Building Relationships with Your Parts
CHAPTER 7: Polarization Picnic: Parts with Opposing Views	CHAPTER 7: Polarization Picnic: Parts with Opposing Views	ГЛАВА 7: Пикник поляризации: части с противоположными взглядами	CHAPTER 7: Polarization Picnic: Parts with Opposing Views
CHAPTER 8: Waterfall: Working with Trauma Expressed in the Body	CHAPTER 8: Waterfall: Working with Trauma Expressed in the Body	ГЛАВА 8: Водопад: работа с травмой, выраженной в теле	CHAPTER 8: Waterfall: Working with Trauma Expressed in the Body
CHAPTER 9: The Weary One: Helping Exhausted Parts	CHAPTER 9: The Weary One: Helping Exhausted Parts	ГЛАВА 9: Усталый: помощь изношенным частям	CHAPTER 9: The Weary One: Helping Exhausted Parts
CHAPTER 10: Elemental Healing: Unburdening and Healing Your Parts	CHAPTER 10: Elemental Healing: Unburdening and Healing Your Parts	ГЛАВА 10: Элементальное исцеление: освобождение и исцеление ваших частей	CHAPTER 10: Elemental Healing: Unburdening and Healing Your Parts
CHAPTER 11: Cabin with the Ancestor: Healing Family and Cultural Legacy Burdens	CHAPTER 11: Cabin with the Ancestor: Healing Family and Cultural Legacy Burdens	ГЛАВА 11: Хижина с предком: исцеление бремени семейного и культурного наследия	CHAPTER 11: Cabin with the Ancestor: Healing Family and Cultural Legacy Burdens
CHAPTER 12: Trailblazer: Integrating Unburdened Part	CHAPTER 12: Trailblazer: Integrating Unburdened Part	ГЛАВА 12: Первопроходец: интеграция необремененной части	CHAPTER 12: Trailblazer: Integrating Unburdened Part
CHAPTER 13: Labyrinth with the Ancestor: A Self-Led Life	CHAPTER 13: Labyrinth with the Ancestor: A Self-Led Life	ГЛАВА 13: Лабиринт с предком: самостоятельная жизнь	CHAPTER 13: Labyrinth with the Ancestor: A Self-Led Life
CHAPTER 14: Still Listening	CHAPTER 14: Still Listening	ГЛАВА 14: Все еще слушаю	CHAPTER 14: Still Listening
Still Listening Resources	Still Listening Resources	Ресурсы, которые все еще слушают	Still Listening Resources
Glossary	Glossary	Глоссарий	Glossary
Endnotes	Endnotes	Сноски	Endnotes
Index	Index	Индекс	Index
Acknowledgments	Acknowledgments	Благодарности	Acknowledgments
About the Author	About the Author	Об авторе	About the Author
Guided Meditation Audio Downloads	Guided Meditation Audio Downloads	Загрузка аудиоматериалов для управляемой медитации	Guided Meditation Audio Downloads
Empower You: Unlimited Audio Mobile App	Empower You: Unlimited Audio Mobile App	Empower You: мобильное приложение с неограниченным количеством аудио	Empower You: Unlimited Audio Mobile App
Continue Your Journey with Hay House	Continue Your Journey with Hay House	Продолжите свое путешествие с Hay House	Continue Your Journey with Hay House
Foreword	Foreword	Предисловие	Foreword
I’m honored to write the foreword for this powerful, groundbreaking book. Its author, Tamala Floyd, in addition to being a Self-led person and terrific writer, is our first Black Internal Family Systems trainer. For probably 30 of the 40 years I’ve been developing IFS, the community was embarrassingly white. I’m so grateful for pioneers like Percy Ballard, Deran Young, and Tamala, who persisted despite hurtful slights they endured from us, until we took seriously the need to educate ourselves to become more racially sensitive. To my delight, the IFS community is quite diverse now because of the efforts of charismatic leaders like Tamala.	I’m honored to write the foreword for this powerful, groundbreaking book. Its author, Tamala Floyd, in addition to being a Self-led person and terrific writer, is our first Black Internal Family Systems trainer. For probably 30 of the 40 years I’ve been developing IFS, the community was embarrassingly white. I’m so grateful for pioneers like Percy Ballard, Deran Young, and Tamala, who persisted despite hurtful slights they endured from us, until we took seriously the need to educate ourselves to become more racially sensitive. To my delight, the IFS community is quite diverse now because of the efforts of charismatic leaders like Tamala.	Для меня большая честь написать предисловие к этой мощной, новаторской книге. Ее автор, Тамала Флойд, помимо того, что является самостоятельным человеком и потрясающим писателем, является нашим первым тренером по внутренним семейным системам чернокожих. Наверное, 30 из 40 лет, когда я разрабатывал IFS, сообщество было досадно белым. Я так благодарен таким пионерам, как Перси Баллард, Деран Янг и Тамала, которые упорствовали, несмотря на обидное пренебрежение, которое они терпели с нашей стороны, пока мы не начали серьезно относиться к необходимости учиться, чтобы стать более расово чувствительными. К моей радости, сообщество IFS теперь довольно разнообразно благодаря усилиям таких харизматичных лидеров, как Тамала.	I’m honored to write the foreword for this powerful, groundbreaking book. Its author, Tamala Floyd, in addition to being a Self-led person and terrific writer, is our first Black Internal Family Systems trainer. For probably 30 of the 40 years I’ve been developing IFS, the community was embarrassingly white. I’m so grateful for pioneers like Percy Ballard, Deran Young, and Tamala, who persisted despite hurtful slights they endured from us, until we took seriously the need to educate ourselves to become more racially sensitive. To my delight, the IFS community is quite diverse now because of the efforts of charismatic leaders like Tamala.
And now she’s contributing this wonderful book, which I love for several reasons. First, traditionally the IFS Institute has focused on training therapists who would then bring IFS to their clients. Recently we have been wanting to find ways to bring it directly to the public, and this book does that beautifully. The format of describing an IFS concept, following that with a personal example followed by a case example and then exercises, is very clear and user-friendly. Tamala’s personal examples are compelling and courageous, and the case studies perfectly illustrate the concepts. People will be able to do considerable work on themselves by trying the exercises, and many IFS therapists will assign this book to clients as an adjunct to the therapy.	And now she’s contributing this wonderful book, which I love for several reasons. First, traditionally the IFS Institute has focused on training therapists who would then bring IFS to their clients. Recently we have been wanting to find ways to bring it directly to the public, and this book does that beautifully. The format of describing an IFS concept, following that with a personal example followed by a case example and then exercises, is very clear and user-friendly. Tamala’s personal examples are compelling and courageous, and the case studies perfectly illustrate the concepts. People will be able to do considerable work on themselves by trying the exercises, and many IFS therapists will assign this book to clients as an adjunct to the therapy.	И теперь она пишет эту замечательную книгу, которую я люблю по нескольким причинам. Во-первых, традиционно Институт IFS уделяет особое внимание подготовке терапевтов, которые затем будут предлагать IFS своим клиентам. В последнее время мы хотели найти способы донести это до публики, и эта книга прекрасно справляется с этой задачей. Формат описания концепции IFS, за которым следует личный пример, затем пример случая и затем упражнения, очень ясен и удобен для пользователя. Личные примеры Тамалы убедительны и смелы, а тематические исследования прекрасно иллюстрируют эту концепцию. Люди смогут проделать значительную работу над собой, попробовав упражнения, и многие терапевты IFS будут давать эту книгу клиентам в качестве дополнения к терапии.	And now she’s contributing this wonderful book, which I love for several reasons. First, traditionally the IFS Institute has focused on training therapists who would then bring IFS to their clients. Recently we have been wanting to find ways to bring it directly to the public, and this book does that beautifully. The format of describing an IFS concept, following that with a personal example followed by a case example and then exercises, is very clear and user-friendly. Tamala’s personal examples are compelling and courageous, and the case studies perfectly illustrate the concepts. People will be able to do considerable work on themselves by trying the exercises, and many IFS therapists will assign this book to clients as an adjunct to the therapy.
Second, I have been wanting the spiritual side of IFS to be more accessible and took a first step in that direction in my last book, No Bad Parts. Tamala takes a bold second step by combining IFS with a system called ancestral medicine healing. I have been working with ancestral spirits for many years but haven’t described that work for fear of IFS being written off as “woo-woo.” In the relatively early days of IFS’s development, I discovered that some of the burdens that parts carried had nothing to do with their lived experiences. Instead, they had been passed down through generations and came from traumas that were decades or centuries old. I called these legacy burdens, and unburdening them has become a big part of the IFS process.	Second, I have been wanting the spiritual side of IFS to be more accessible and took a first step in that direction in my last book, No Bad Parts. Tamala takes a bold second step by combining IFS with a system called ancestral medicine healing. I have been working with ancestral spirits for many years but haven’t described that work for fear of IFS being written off as “woo-woo.” In the relatively early days of IFS’s development, I discovered that some of the burdens that parts carried had nothing to do with their lived experiences. Instead, they had been passed down through generations and came from traumas that were decades or centuries old. I called these legacy burdens, and unburdening them has become a big part of the IFS process.	Во-вторых, я хотел, чтобы духовная сторона IFS была более доступной, и сделал первый шаг в этом направлении в своей последней книге «Нет плохих деталей». Тамала делает второй смелый шаг, объединяя IFS с системой, называемой «исцеление медициной предков». Я работаю с духами предков уже много лет, но не описываю эту работу, опасаясь, что IFS спишут на «угу-уу». На относительно ранних этапах разработки IFS я обнаружил, что некоторые нагрузки, которые несли части, не имели ничего общего с их жизненным опытом. Вместо этого они передавались из поколения в поколение и возникли в результате травм, произошедших десятилетиями или столетиями. Я назвал это бременем наследия, и его облегчение стало важной частью процесса IFS.	Second, I have been wanting the spiritual side of IFS to be more accessible and took a first step in that direction in my last book, No Bad Parts. Tamala takes a bold second step by combining IFS with a system called ancestral medicine healing. I have been working with ancestral spirits for many years but haven’t described that work for fear of IFS being written off as “woo-woo.” In the relatively early days of IFS’s development, I discovered that some of the burdens that parts carried had nothing to do with their lived experiences. Instead, they had been passed down through generations and came from traumas that were decades or centuries old. I called these legacy burdens, and unburdening them has become a big part of the IFS process.
Over the past several decades, I and many other IFS therapists have found that the spirits of clients’ relatives would come to them spontaneously during sessions. After getting my skeptical parts to relax, I found those spirits to be very helpful guides for navigating clients’ inner and outer lives; and they also provided clients with valuable qualities we came to call heirlooms. Now that IFS is so widespread and popular, I am emboldened to speak more openly about that kind of work and am grateful to Tamala for offering such a clear path to it, with beautiful examples and descriptions. I encourage you to work with parts who might be allergic to anything spiritual so you can experience the abundant gifts that this book offers, many of which do not relate to spirituality. You don’t have to believe in the otherworldly to benefit enormously from this book.	Over the past several decades, I and many other IFS therapists have found that the spirits of clients’ relatives would come to them spontaneously during sessions. After getting my skeptical parts to relax, I found those spirits to be very helpful guides for navigating clients’ inner and outer lives; and they also provided clients with valuable qualities we came to call heirlooms. Now that IFS is so widespread and popular, I am emboldened to speak more openly about that kind of work and am grateful to Tamala for offering such a clear path to it, with beautiful examples and descriptions. I encourage you to work with parts who might be allergic to anything spiritual so you can experience the abundant gifts that this book offers, many of which do not relate to spirituality. You don’t have to believe in the otherworldly to benefit enormously from this book.	За последние несколько десятилетий я и многие другие терапевты IFS обнаружили, что духи родственников клиентов спонтанно приходили к ним во время сеансов. После того, как я расслабил свои скептические части, я обнаружил, что эти духи являются очень полезными проводниками для навигации по внутренней и внешней жизни клиентов; а также они наделяли клиентов ценными качествами, которые мы стали называть семейными реликвиями. Теперь, когда IFS настолько широко распространена и популярна, я осмелился более открыто говорить об этом виде работы и благодарен Тамале за то, что она предложила такой ясный путь к ней, с прекрасными примерами и описаниями. Я призываю вас работать с частями тела, у которых может быть аллергия на что-либо духовное, чтобы вы могли ощутить обильные дары, которые предлагает эта книга, многие из которых не имеют отношения к духовности. Вам не обязательно верить в потусторонний мир, чтобы получить огромную пользу от этой книги.	Over the past several decades, I and many other IFS therapists have found that the spirits of clients’ relatives would come to them spontaneously during sessions. After getting my skeptical parts to relax, I found those spirits to be very helpful guides for navigating clients’ inner and outer lives; and they also provided clients with valuable qualities we came to call heirlooms. Now that IFS is so widespread and popular, I am emboldened to speak more openly about that kind of work and am grateful to Tamala for offering such a clear path to it, with beautiful examples and descriptions. I encourage you to work with parts who might be allergic to anything spiritual so you can experience the abundant gifts that this book offers, many of which do not relate to spirituality. You don’t have to believe in the otherworldly to benefit enormously from this book.
Finally, because of Tamala’s extensive experience working with BIPOC clients, this book fills a void in the IFS literature. The case examples offer a window into common struggles of people of color and how to unload legacy burdens like that of the Strong Black Woman, the roots of which lie in slavery. Tamala’s rich prose brings both her personal and case vignettes to life.	Finally, because of Tamala’s extensive experience working with BIPOC clients, this book fills a void in the IFS literature. The case examples offer a window into common struggles of people of color and how to unload legacy burdens like that of the Strong Black Woman, the roots of which lie in slavery. Tamala’s rich prose brings both her personal and case vignettes to life.	Наконец, благодаря обширному опыту Тамалы в работе с клиентами BIPOC, эта книга заполняет пробел в литературе IFS. Примеры случаев открывают окно в общую борьбу цветных людей и в то, как избавиться от бремени наследия, подобного бремени «Сильной черной женщины», корни которого лежат в рабстве. Богатая проза Тамалы воплощает в жизнь как ее личные, так и конкретные эпизоды.	Finally, because of Tamala’s extensive experience working with BIPOC clients, this book fills a void in the IFS literature. The case examples offer a window into common struggles of people of color and how to unload legacy burdens like that of the Strong Black Woman, the roots of which lie in slavery. Tamala’s rich prose brings both her personal and case vignettes to life.
This book is destined to become a classic in the IFS community and, I hope and expect, in the self-help and psychotherapy worlds too. I’m so grateful for all the riches in it and for all of Tamala’s many contributions to our community.	This book is destined to become a classic in the IFS community and, I hope and expect, in the self-help and psychotherapy worlds too. I’m so grateful for all the riches in it and for all of Tamala’s many contributions to our community.	Этой книге суждено стать классикой в ​​сообществе IFS, а также, я надеюсь и ожидаю, в мире самопомощи и психотерапии. Я так благодарен за все это богатство и за весь большой вклад Тамалы в наше сообщество.	This book is destined to become a classic in the IFS community and, I hope and expect, in the self-help and psychotherapy worlds too. I’m so grateful for all the riches in it and for all of Tamala’s many contributions to our community.
— Richard C. Schwartz, Ph.D., founder of Internal Family Systems Therapy	— Richard C. Schwartz, Ph.D., founder of Internal Family Systems Therapy	— Ричард К. Шварц, доктор философии, основатель внутренней семейной системной терапии.	— Richard C. Schwartz, Ph.D., founder of Internal Family Systems Therapy
CHAPTER 1	CHAPTER 1	ГЛАВА 1	CHAPTER 1
The Ancestors and Internal Family Systems Therapy	The Ancestors and Internal Family Systems Therapy	Предки и внутренняя семейная системная терапия	The Ancestors and Internal Family Systems Therapy
I sit across the table from my friend and colleague Daphne enthralled, listening to her words with my whole body. My skin absorbs her excitement. I feel my heart opening and expanding. My mind full of questions and my voice ready to engage the conversation fully. I find what she’s sharing riveting, unbelievable, and resonant. Daphne shares in hushed tones, not wanting the diners around us to overhear, how her connection with her ancestors through a process called ancestral lineage healing is helping her through a tough divorce. “I know this sounds woo-woo,” she says. But she can’t deny the miraculous impact of her ancestors’ expression of love through guidance, support, advice, and care.	I sit across the table from my friend and colleague Daphne enthralled, listening to her words with my whole body. My skin absorbs her excitement. I feel my heart opening and expanding. My mind full of questions and my voice ready to engage the conversation fully. I find what she’s sharing riveting, unbelievable, and resonant. Daphne shares in hushed tones, not wanting the diners around us to overhear, how her connection with her ancestors through a process called ancestral lineage healing is helping her through a tough divorce. “I know this sounds woo-woo,” she says. But she can’t deny the miraculous impact of her ancestors’ expression of love through guidance, support, advice, and care.	Я сижу за столом напротив своей подруги и коллеги Дафны, очарованная, слушая ее слова всем телом. Моя кожа впитывает ее волнение. Я чувствую, как мое сердце открывается и расширяется. Мой разум полон вопросов, и мой голос готов полностью включиться в разговор. Я нахожу то, чем она делится, захватывающим, невероятным и резонансным. Дафна тихим голосом делится, не желая, чтобы посетители вокруг нас подслушали, как ее связь с предками посредством процесса, называемого исцелением родословной, помогает ей пережить тяжелый развод. «Я знаю, это звучит уу-уу», — говорит она. Но она не может отрицать чудесное влияние выражения любви ее предков через руководство, поддержку, совет и заботу.	I sit across the table from my friend and colleague Daphne enthralled, listening to her words with my whole body. My skin absorbs her excitement. I feel my heart opening and expanding. My mind full of questions and my voice ready to engage the conversation fully. I find what she’s sharing riveting, unbelievable, and resonant. Daphne shares in hushed tones, not wanting the diners around us to overhear, how her connection with her ancestors through a process called ancestral lineage healing is helping her through a tough divorce. “I know this sounds woo-woo,” she says. But she can’t deny the miraculous impact of her ancestors’ expression of love through guidance, support, advice, and care.
She goes on to talk about the synchronicity and alignment of people brought into her life at exactly the right time to assist her since the beginning of her ancestral healing journey. She shares her experiences with such conviction that a part of me wants to sign up immediately. However, a part that holds skepticism thinks, “How can dead people you’ve never met help you in your life? This is a load of crap!”	She goes on to talk about the synchronicity and alignment of people brought into her life at exactly the right time to assist her since the beginning of her ancestral healing journey. She shares her experiences with such conviction that a part of me wants to sign up immediately. However, a part that holds skepticism thinks, “How can dead people you’ve never met help you in your life? This is a load of crap!”	Далее она говорит о синхронности и согласованности людей, пришедших в ее жизнь в нужное время, чтобы помочь ей с самого начала пути исцеления ее предков. Она делится своим опытом с такой убежденностью, что часть меня хочет немедленно подписаться. Однако часть, которая придерживается скептицизма, думает: «Как могут мертвые люди, которых ты никогда не встречал, помочь тебе в твоей жизни? Это полная чушь!»	She goes on to talk about the synchronicity and alignment of people brought into her life at exactly the right time to assist her since the beginning of her ancestral healing journey. She shares her experiences with such conviction that a part of me wants to sign up immediately. However, a part that holds skepticism thinks, “How can dead people you’ve never met help you in your life? This is a load of crap!”
I spent the greater part of my adult life seeking my own healing from childhood trauma and professionally supporting others in their healing as a psychotherapist and coach. I watched firsthand as my friend Daphne healed using the knowledge, wisdom, and support of her loving ancestors. The combination of my unfolding research on ancestral lineage healing, my ongoing search for personal healing, and my commitment to championing the healing of others satisfied the skeptical part. She—the skeptical part—came to understand the importance of this work. As the part of me that was initially leery relaxed, I began my ancestral healing journey.	I spent the greater part of my adult life seeking my own healing from childhood trauma and professionally supporting others in their healing as a psychotherapist and coach. I watched firsthand as my friend Daphne healed using the knowledge, wisdom, and support of her loving ancestors. The combination of my unfolding research on ancestral lineage healing, my ongoing search for personal healing, and my commitment to championing the healing of others satisfied the skeptical part. She—the skeptical part—came to understand the importance of this work. As the part of me that was initially leery relaxed, I began my ancestral healing journey.	Большую часть своей взрослой жизни я провел в поисках собственного исцеления от детской травмы и профессионально поддерживая других в их исцелении в качестве психотерапевта и тренера. Я своими глазами наблюдал, как моя подруга Дафна исцелялась, используя знания, мудрость и поддержку своих любящих предков. Сочетание моих разворачивающихся исследований в области исцеления наследственной линии, моего постоянного поиска личного исцеления и моей приверженности делу исцеления других удовлетворило скептическую часть. Она — скептическая часть — пришла к пониманию важности этой работы. Когда та часть меня, которая изначально была настороженной, расслабилась, я начал свой путь исцеления предков.	I spent the greater part of my adult life seeking my own healing from childhood trauma and professionally supporting others in their healing as a psychotherapist and coach. I watched firsthand as my friend Daphne healed using the knowledge, wisdom, and support of her loving ancestors. The combination of my unfolding research on ancestral lineage healing, my ongoing search for personal healing, and my commitment to championing the healing of others satisfied the skeptical part. She—the skeptical part—came to understand the importance of this work. As the part of me that was initially leery relaxed, I began my ancestral healing journey.
MY BEGINNINGS WITH IFS AND ANCESTOR WISDOM	MY BEGINNINGS WITH IFS AND ANCESTOR WISDOM	МОЕ НАЧАЛО С IFS И МУДРОСТИ ПРЕДКОВ	MY BEGINNINGS WITH IFS AND ANCESTOR WISDOM
I had that foreshadowing conversation with Daphne when she and I were working together as program assistants on a training held by the organization Black Therapists Rock to introduce Black therapists to Internal Family Systems Therapy—the modality I specialized in, which was viewed as a game-changer in the fields of psychotherapy and trauma healing. I had come to Internal Family Systems (IFS) first as a student, then as a client, and in the course of my own healing discovered it allowed access to my internal psyche that was not previously available. I sought treatment for years for childhood traumas, but I didn’t receive healing until I discovered IFS. When I did, I gained an awareness that I am not of one mind, but composed of multiple minds or subpersonalities. Before IFS therapy, I thought I was the one who held the pain and experiences of my traumas. I came to understand that the subpersonalities or parts were the wounded ones, and I also had parts who were not affected by the traumas. IFS applied language and steps to what I intuitively knew but couldn’t quite prove: we all already have what we need to heal. With my clients, my job is to help them gain access to their healing potential.	I had that foreshadowing conversation with Daphne when she and I were working together as program assistants on a training held by the organization Black Therapists Rock to introduce Black therapists to Internal Family Systems Therapy—the modality I specialized in, which was viewed as a game-changer in the fields of psychotherapy and trauma healing. I had come to Internal Family Systems (IFS) first as a student, then as a client, and in the course of my own healing discovered it allowed access to my internal psyche that was not previously available. I sought treatment for years for childhood traumas, but I didn’t receive healing until I discovered IFS. When I did, I gained an awareness that I am not of one mind, but composed of multiple minds or subpersonalities. Before IFS therapy, I thought I was the one who held the pain and experiences of my traumas. I came to understand that the subpersonalities or parts were the wounded ones, and I also had parts who were not affected by the traumas. IFS applied language and steps to what I intuitively knew but couldn’t quite prove: we all already have what we need to heal. With my clients, my job is to help them gain access to their healing potential.	У меня был этот многообещающий разговор с Дафной, когда мы с ней вместе работали в качестве ассистентов программы на тренинге, проводимом организацией Black Therapists Rock, чтобы познакомить чернокожих терапевтов с внутренней семейной системной терапией — методом, на котором я специализировался, который рассматривался как игра. революционер в области психотерапии и исцеления травм. Я пришел во «Внутренние семейные системы» (IFS) сначала как студент, затем как клиент, и в ходе собственного исцеления обнаружил, что это открывает доступ к моей внутренней психике, который ранее был недоступен. Я много лет искал лечения от детских травм, но не получал исцеления, пока не обнаружил IFS. Когда я это сделал, я осознал, что у меня не один разум, а состою из множества разумов или субличностей. До терапии IFS я думал, что именно я храню боль и переживания своих травм. Я пришел к пониманию, что субличности или части были ранеными, а также у меня были части, которые не были затронуты травмами. IFS применил язык и шаги к тому, что я интуитивно знал, но не мог доказать: у всех нас уже есть то, что нам нужно исцелить. Моя работа с моими клиентами — помочь им получить доступ к их целебному потенциалу.	I had that foreshadowing conversation with Daphne when she and I were working together as program assistants on a training held by the organization Black Therapists Rock to introduce Black therapists to Internal Family Systems Therapy—the modality I specialized in, which was viewed as a game-changer in the fields of psychotherapy and trauma healing. I had come to Internal Family Systems (IFS) first as a student, then as a client, and in the course of my own healing discovered it allowed access to my internal psyche that was not previously available. I sought treatment for years for childhood traumas, but I didn’t receive healing until I discovered IFS. When I did, I gained an awareness that I am not of one mind, but composed of multiple minds or subpersonalities. Before IFS therapy, I thought I was the one who held the pain and experiences of my traumas. I came to understand that the subpersonalities or parts were the wounded ones, and I also had parts who were not affected by the traumas. IFS applied language and steps to what I intuitively knew but couldn’t quite prove: we all already have what we need to heal. With my clients, my job is to help them gain access to their healing potential.
Another instrumental component in my healing journey was ancestor healing work. My conversation with Daphne stirred a desire in me to build relationships with my own ancestors. I began working with an ancestral medicine healing practitioner to not only build relationships but also heal generational trauma on multiple ancestral family lines and receive the intergenerational gifts of these lines. Through the healing practices of IFS and ancestral medicine, I have created enduring relationships with my parts and ancestors, who continue to support me in my daily life and all its challenges.	Another instrumental component in my healing journey was ancestor healing work. My conversation with Daphne stirred a desire in me to build relationships with my own ancestors. I began working with an ancestral medicine healing practitioner to not only build relationships but also heal generational trauma on multiple ancestral family lines and receive the intergenerational gifts of these lines. Through the healing practices of IFS and ancestral medicine, I have created enduring relationships with my parts and ancestors, who continue to support me in my daily life and all its challenges.	Еще одним важным компонентом моего пути к исцелению была работа по исцелению предков. Мой разговор с Дафной пробудил во мне желание построить отношения с собственными предками. Я начал работать с практикующим врачом-исцелителем предков, чтобы не только построить отношения, но и исцелить травмы поколений в нескольких семейных линиях предков и получить дары этих линий от поколения к поколению. Благодаря целительским практикам IFS и медицине предков я установил прочные отношения со своими частями тела и предками, которые продолжают поддерживать меня в моей повседневной жизни и во всех ее трудностях.	Another instrumental component in my healing journey was ancestor healing work. My conversation with Daphne stirred a desire in me to build relationships with my own ancestors. I began working with an ancestral medicine healing practitioner to not only build relationships but also heal generational trauma on multiple ancestral family lines and receive the intergenerational gifts of these lines. Through the healing practices of IFS and ancestral medicine, I have created enduring relationships with my parts and ancestors, who continue to support me in my daily life and all its challenges.
My personal experience with these two healing modalities informed my practice with clients. I immediately shifted to providing IFS therapy exclusively, because I knew it was the best way to treat significant trauma and to achieve positive shifts in a shorter period. I describe IFS to my clients as a therapy that gets to the root of the problem instead of treating symptoms. Clients aren’t simply being taught how to cope; they experience deep healing. Healing shifts the entire system, allowing clients to move through the world and their lives in ways that were unavailable to them before IFS therapy.	My personal experience with these two healing modalities informed my practice with clients. I immediately shifted to providing IFS therapy exclusively, because I knew it was the best way to treat significant trauma and to achieve positive shifts in a shorter period. I describe IFS to my clients as a therapy that gets to the root of the problem instead of treating symptoms. Clients aren’t simply being taught how to cope; they experience deep healing. Healing shifts the entire system, allowing clients to move through the world and their lives in ways that were unavailable to them before IFS therapy.	Мой личный опыт применения этих двух методов лечения лег в основу моей практики работы с клиентами. Я немедленно перешел на исключительно терапию IFS, потому что знал, что это лучший способ вылечить серьезную травму и добиться положительных сдвигов за более короткий период. Своим клиентам я описываю IFS как терапию, направленную на корень проблемы, а не на лечение симптомов. Клиентов не просто учат, как справляться; они переживают глубокое исцеление. Исцеление меняет всю систему, позволяя клиентам перемещаться по миру и своей жизни способами, которые были им недоступны до терапии IFS.	My personal experience with these two healing modalities informed my practice with clients. I immediately shifted to providing IFS therapy exclusively, because I knew it was the best way to treat significant trauma and to achieve positive shifts in a shorter period. I describe IFS to my clients as a therapy that gets to the root of the problem instead of treating symptoms. Clients aren’t simply being taught how to cope; they experience deep healing. Healing shifts the entire system, allowing clients to move through the world and their lives in ways that were unavailable to them before IFS therapy.
When I learned about IFS, I had been treating a primarily Black female clientele, as well as other women of color, some white women, and some male clients, for over 20 years. My areas of expertise include childhood sexual abuse, molestation, and physical abuse, and I have witnessed the pain Black women in particular carry with these histories. They are unduly burdened with beliefs and feelings of irreparable brokenness, worthlessness, never feeling good enough or lovable; additionally, they carry the pain of stolen innocence, abandonment, rejection, otherness, and aloneness. This results in self-blame to make sense of what happened to them, or a quest for perfection to compensate for what happened, or acceptance of demeaning and humiliating treatment by themselves and others to recreate the familiar.	When I learned about IFS, I had been treating a primarily Black female clientele, as well as other women of color, some white women, and some male clients, for over 20 years. My areas of expertise include childhood sexual abuse, molestation, and physical abuse, and I have witnessed the pain Black women in particular carry with these histories. They are unduly burdened with beliefs and feelings of irreparable brokenness, worthlessness, never feeling good enough or lovable; additionally, they carry the pain of stolen innocence, abandonment, rejection, otherness, and aloneness. This results in self-blame to make sense of what happened to them, or a quest for perfection to compensate for what happened, or acceptance of demeaning and humiliating treatment by themselves and others to recreate the familiar.	Когда я узнала об IFS, я уже более 20 лет обслуживала клиентов преимущественно чернокожих женщин, а также других цветных женщин, некоторых белых женщин и некоторых клиентов-мужчин. В сферу моей компетенции входит сексуальное насилие, приставания и физическое насилие в детстве, и я была свидетельницей боли, которую особенно несут чернокожие женщины в своих историях. Они чрезмерно обременены убеждениями и чувствами непоправимой сломленности, никчемности, никогда не чувствуют себя достаточно хорошими или привлекательными; кроме того, они несут в себе боль украденной невинности, заброшенности, отвержения, инаковости и одиночества. Это приводит к самообвинению, чтобы осмыслить то, что с ними произошло, или к стремлению к совершенству, чтобы компенсировать случившееся, или к принятию унизительного и унизительного обращения со стороны себя и других, чтобы воссоздать привычное.	When I learned about IFS, I had been treating a primarily Black female clientele, as well as other women of color, some white women, and some male clients, for over 20 years. My areas of expertise include childhood sexual abuse, molestation, and physical abuse, and I have witnessed the pain Black women in particular carry with these histories. They are unduly burdened with beliefs and feelings of irreparable brokenness, worthlessness, never feeling good enough or lovable; additionally, they carry the pain of stolen innocence, abandonment, rejection, otherness, and aloneness. This results in self-blame to make sense of what happened to them, or a quest for perfection to compensate for what happened, or acceptance of demeaning and humiliating treatment by themselves and others to recreate the familiar.
As a Black woman, I find that a notable difference in working with Black women clients as compared to my other clients is an immediate comfort and feeling of safety. I’m not sure if this is related to the kinship shared between Black folks, but I believe that’s part of it. On many occasions I’ve been told, “My body relaxed when I found out you were Black,” or “I don’t have to explain and defend my Black experiences with you,” or “It feels safe to share my abuse with another Black woman,” or “I’m not bracing for your response as I’ve done with white therapists.” I share this for two reasons: first, to acknowledge the profound impact of receiving healing from someone who looks like you, and second, to bring attention to the inherent extra burden carried by Black clients who have white therapists. I believe it is the therapist’s responsibility to address the obvious differences early on, keep the lines of communication open around the topic of race, and to own their blind spots throughout the therapeutic relationship.	As a Black woman, I find that a notable difference in working with Black women clients as compared to my other clients is an immediate comfort and feeling of safety. I’m not sure if this is related to the kinship shared between Black folks, but I believe that’s part of it. On many occasions I’ve been told, “My body relaxed when I found out you were Black,” or “I don’t have to explain and defend my Black experiences with you,” or “It feels safe to share my abuse with another Black woman,” or “I’m not bracing for your response as I’ve done with white therapists.” I share this for two reasons: first, to acknowledge the profound impact of receiving healing from someone who looks like you, and second, to bring attention to the inherent extra burden carried by Black clients who have white therapists. I believe it is the therapist’s responsibility to address the obvious differences early on, keep the lines of communication open around the topic of race, and to own their blind spots throughout the therapeutic relationship.	Как чернокожая женщина, я считаю, что заметная разница в работе с клиентами чернокожих женщин по сравнению с другими моими клиентами — это немедленный комфорт и чувство безопасности. Я не уверен, связано ли это с родством между чернокожими людьми, но я считаю, что это часть этого. Во многих случаях мне говорили: «Мое тело расслабилось, когда я узнал, что ты черный», или «Мне не нужно объяснять и защищать свой черный опыт с тобой», или «Мне кажется безопасным поделиться своим насилием с другая чернокожая женщина» или «Я не жду вашего ответа, как это было с белыми терапевтами». Я разделяю это по двум причинам: во-первых, чтобы признать глубокое влияние исцеления от человека, похожего на вас, и, во-вторых, чтобы привлечь внимание к дополнительному бремени, которое несут чернокожие клиенты, у которых есть белые терапевты. Я считаю, что ответственность терапевта - устранять очевидные различия на раннем этапе, сохранять открытыми линии общения по теме расы и владеть своими «слепыми пятнами» на протяжении всех терапевтических отношений.	As a Black woman, I find that a notable difference in working with Black women clients as compared to my other clients is an immediate comfort and feeling of safety. I’m not sure if this is related to the kinship shared between Black folks, but I believe that’s part of it. On many occasions I’ve been told, “My body relaxed when I found out you were Black,” or “I don’t have to explain and defend my Black experiences with you,” or “It feels safe to share my abuse with another Black woman,” or “I’m not bracing for your response as I’ve done with white therapists.” I share this for two reasons: first, to acknowledge the profound impact of receiving healing from someone who looks like you, and second, to bring attention to the inherent extra burden carried by Black clients who have white therapists. I believe it is the therapist’s responsibility to address the obvious differences early on, keep the lines of communication open around the topic of race, and to own their blind spots throughout the therapeutic relationship.
WHAT IS INTERNAL FAMILY SYSTEMS THERAPY?	WHAT IS INTERNAL FAMILY SYSTEMS THERAPY?	ЧТО ТАКОЕ ВНУТРЕННЯЯ СЕМЕЙНАЯ СИСТЕМНАЯ ТЕРАПИЯ?	WHAT IS INTERNAL FAMILY SYSTEMS THERAPY?
Internal Family Systems (IFS) therapy was developed by Dr. Richard Schwartz through his work with eating-disordered adolescents in the 1980s. He found that his clients spoke about “parts” of themselves, and as he began to understand from his clients how parts operate within our internal system, he discovered that we all have parts; it is the norm, not the exception. Dr. Schwartz learned that clients had internal conversations with their parts and could get separation from their parts and the parts’ extreme behavior. When separation occurred, he found, clients became calm, curious, and nonjudgmental. Self is the term he used to describe this calm center, this deep essence at the core of every person. Within the internal system—essentially an internal “family”—Self acts as a wise, compassionate leader able to heal and lead.1 The goals of IFS therapy, as stated in the classic work on the model by Richard Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, are to liberate parts from their extreme roles, restore Self-leadership, create balance and harmony within the system, and to bring Self-energy to the external world.2	Internal Family Systems (IFS) therapy was developed by Dr. Richard Schwartz through his work with eating-disordered adolescents in the 1980s. He found that his clients spoke about “parts” of themselves, and as he began to understand from his clients how parts operate within our internal system, he discovered that we all have parts; it is the norm, not the exception. Dr. Schwartz learned that clients had internal conversations with their parts and could get separation from their parts and the parts’ extreme behavior. When separation occurred, he found, clients became calm, curious, and nonjudgmental. Self is the term he used to describe this calm center, this deep essence at the core of every person. Within the internal system—essentially an internal “family”—Self acts as a wise, compassionate leader able to heal and lead.1 The goals of IFS therapy, as stated in the classic work on the model by Richard Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, are to liberate parts from their extreme roles, restore Self-leadership, create balance and harmony within the system, and to bring Self-energy to the external world.2	Терапия внутренних семейных систем (IFS) была разработана доктором Ричардом Шварцем в ходе его работы с подростками с расстройствами пищевого поведения в 1980-х годах. Он обнаружил, что его клиенты говорили о «частях» себя, и когда он начал понимать от своих клиентов, как части действуют в нашей внутренней системе, он обнаружил, что у всех нас есть части; это норма, а не исключение. Доктор Шварц узнал, что клиенты ведут внутренние разговоры со своими частями и могут добиться отделения от своих частей и их экстремального поведения. Он обнаружил, что когда происходит расставание, клиенты становятся спокойными, любопытными и непредвзятыми. «Я» — это термин, который он использовал для описания этого спокойного центра, этой глубокой сущности, лежащей в основе каждого человека. Внутри внутренней системы – по сути, внутренней «семьи» – Самость действует как мудрый, сострадательный лидер, способный исцелять и руководить. освободить части от их крайних ролей, восстановить Самолидерство, создать баланс и гармонию внутри системы и привнести Собственную энергию во внешний мир.2	Internal Family Systems (IFS) therapy was developed by Dr. Richard Schwartz through his work with eating-disordered adolescents in the 1980s. He found that his clients spoke about “parts” of themselves, and as he began to understand from his clients how parts operate within our internal system, he discovered that we all have parts; it is the norm, not the exception. Dr. Schwartz learned that clients had internal conversations with their parts and could get separation from their parts and the parts’ extreme behavior. When separation occurred, he found, clients became calm, curious, and nonjudgmental. Self is the term he used to describe this calm center, this deep essence at the core of every person. Within the internal system—essentially an internal “family”—Self acts as a wise, compassionate leader able to heal and lead.1 The goals of IFS therapy, as stated in the classic work on the model by Richard Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, are to liberate parts from their extreme roles, restore Self-leadership, create balance and harmony within the system, and to bring Self-energy to the external world.2
Achieving the goals of IFS therapy gives us access to a wealth of life-changing benefits. When we liberate our parts from their extreme roles, they are less reactive, which increases our options of choice and improves relationships. In addition, we can access their innate wisdom as advisors. The restoration of Self-leadership means Self is at the head of our internal system. When parts trust Self to lead, they are open to its help when they get activated; they can relax, allowing Self to make decisions and choices in the best interests of the entire system. For example, when a frustrated part trusts Self, it will share the cause of its upset with Self and, instead of acting out of its frustration, allow Self to speak on its behalf. The more trust between parts and Self, the greater access parts have to Self as a supportive leader, increasing the balance and harmony within the system. We feel more comfortable and present in our body when Self leads instead of our parts. We can bring more Self-energy to the external world when we are grounded in the present and accept that everyone has parts and not personalize the poor behavior of others.	Achieving the goals of IFS therapy gives us access to a wealth of life-changing benefits. When we liberate our parts from their extreme roles, they are less reactive, which increases our options of choice and improves relationships. In addition, we can access their innate wisdom as advisors. The restoration of Self-leadership means Self is at the head of our internal system. When parts trust Self to lead, they are open to its help when they get activated; they can relax, allowing Self to make decisions and choices in the best interests of the entire system. For example, when a frustrated part trusts Self, it will share the cause of its upset with Self and, instead of acting out of its frustration, allow Self to speak on its behalf. The more trust between parts and Self, the greater access parts have to Self as a supportive leader, increasing the balance and harmony within the system. We feel more comfortable and present in our body when Self leads instead of our parts. We can bring more Self-energy to the external world when we are grounded in the present and accept that everyone has parts and not personalize the poor behavior of others.	Достижение целей терапии IFS дает нам доступ к множеству преимуществ, меняющих жизнь. Когда мы освобождаем свои части от их крайних ролей, они становятся менее реактивными, что расширяет наши возможности выбора и улучшает отношения. Кроме того, мы можем получить доступ к их врожденной мудрости в качестве советников. Восстановление Самолидерства означает, что Самость стоит во главе нашей внутренней системы. Когда части доверяют «Я» руководить, они открыты для его помощи, когда они активируются; они могут расслабиться, позволяя себе принимать решения и делать выбор в интересах всей системы. Например, когда разочарованная часть доверяет «Я», она поделится с «Я» причиной своего расстройства и вместо того, чтобы действовать из-за своего разочарования, позволит «Я» говорить от ее имени. Чем больше доверия между частями и «Я», тем больший доступ части имеют к «Я» как к поддерживающему лидеру, увеличивая баланс и гармонию внутри системы. Мы чувствуем себя более комфортно и присутствуем в своем теле, когда «Я» руководит нами, а не нашими частями. Мы можем привнести больше собственной энергии во внешний мир, если укоренимся в настоящем и признаем, что у каждого есть свои части, а не персонализируем плохое поведение других.	Achieving the goals of IFS therapy gives us access to a wealth of life-changing benefits. When we liberate our parts from their extreme roles, they are less reactive, which increases our options of choice and improves relationships. In addition, we can access their innate wisdom as advisors. The restoration of Self-leadership means Self is at the head of our internal system. When parts trust Self to lead, they are open to its help when they get activated; they can relax, allowing Self to make decisions and choices in the best interests of the entire system. For example, when a frustrated part trusts Self, it will share the cause of its upset with Self and, instead of acting out of its frustration, allow Self to speak on its behalf. The more trust between parts and Self, the greater access parts have to Self as a supportive leader, increasing the balance and harmony within the system. We feel more comfortable and present in our body when Self leads instead of our parts. We can bring more Self-energy to the external world when we are grounded in the present and accept that everyone has parts and not personalize the poor behavior of others.
WHAT IS ANCESTRAL LINEAGE HEALING?	WHAT IS ANCESTRAL LINEAGE HEALING?	ЧТО ТАКОЕ ИСЦЕЛЕНИЕ РОДОВОЙ ПРОИСХОЖДЕННОСТИ?	WHAT IS ANCESTRAL LINEAGE HEALING?
In my quest to learn about ancestral lineage healing, I found several definitions I’d like to share with you. The practitioner I eventually sought out and continue to work with, Jamari White, defines ancestral lineage healing as follows: “Ancestral lineage healing is a ritual practice of cultivating conscious, vibrant connection with your ancestors to heal intergenerational trauma, and reclaim and embody centuries of lost ancestral wisdom and guidance.”3 It’s that last part about accessing lost wisdom that intrigued and propelled me forward. In Daniel Foor’s book, Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing, I learned the benefits of connecting and being in relationship with ancestors to heal generational trauma. Foor says, “Ancestral lineage healing is a specific approach to relating directly with wise and loving lineage ancestors for the purposes of personal, family and cultural healing.” I was most drawn to this approach because of the multidimensional healing benefits.4 Foor outlines how relating to ancestors supports psychological and physical health, heals intergenerational family dysfunction, and culturally transforms historical and collective trauma.5	In my quest to learn about ancestral lineage healing, I found several definitions I’d like to share with you. The practitioner I eventually sought out and continue to work with, Jamari White, defines ancestral lineage healing as follows: “Ancestral lineage healing is a ritual practice of cultivating conscious, vibrant connection with your ancestors to heal intergenerational trauma, and reclaim and embody centuries of lost ancestral wisdom and guidance.”3 It’s that last part about accessing lost wisdom that intrigued and propelled me forward. In Daniel Foor’s book, Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing, I learned the benefits of connecting and being in relationship with ancestors to heal generational trauma. Foor says, “Ancestral lineage healing is a specific approach to relating directly with wise and loving lineage ancestors for the purposes of personal, family and cultural healing.” I was most drawn to this approach because of the multidimensional healing benefits.4 Foor outlines how relating to ancestors supports psychological and physical health, heals intergenerational family dysfunction, and culturally transforms historical and collective trauma.5	В своем стремлении узнать об исцелении наследственной линии я нашел несколько определений, которыми хотел бы поделиться с вами. Практик, которого я в конечном итоге нашел и с которым продолжаю работать, Джамари Уайт, определяет исцеление по линии предков следующим образом: «Исцеление по линии предков — это ритуальная практика развития сознательной, живой связи с вашими предками для исцеления травм, перенесенных из поколения в поколение, а также для восстановления и воплощения вековых традиций. утраченная мудрость и руководство предков»3. Именно последняя часть о доступе к утраченной мудрости заинтриговала и подтолкнула меня вперед. В книге Дэниела Фура «Медицина предков: ритуалы личного и семейного исцеления» я узнал о преимуществах связи и отношений с предками для исцеления травм поколений. Фур говорит: «Исцеление по линии предков — это особый подход к прямому общению с мудрыми и любящими предками по линии в целях личного, семейного и культурного исцеления». Меня больше всего привлек этот подход из-за многомерных целебных преимуществ. Фур описывает, как отношения с предками поддерживают психологическое и физическое здоровье, лечат семейные дисфункции, передаваемые из поколения в поколение, и культурно трансформируют исторические и коллективные травмы.5	In my quest to learn about ancestral lineage healing, I found several definitions I’d like to share with you. The practitioner I eventually sought out and continue to work with, Jamari White, defines ancestral lineage healing as follows: “Ancestral lineage healing is a ritual practice of cultivating conscious, vibrant connection with your ancestors to heal intergenerational trauma, and reclaim and embody centuries of lost ancestral wisdom and guidance.”3 It’s that last part about accessing lost wisdom that intrigued and propelled me forward. In Daniel Foor’s book, Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing, I learned the benefits of connecting and being in relationship with ancestors to heal generational trauma. Foor says, “Ancestral lineage healing is a specific approach to relating directly with wise and loving lineage ancestors for the purposes of personal, family and cultural healing.” I was most drawn to this approach because of the multidimensional healing benefits.4 Foor outlines how relating to ancestors supports psychological and physical health, heals intergenerational family dysfunction, and culturally transforms historical and collective trauma.5
My personal experiences with ancestor healing practices increased my trust in the wisdom of our ancestors. I started using my ancestor-inspired meditations with clients (more about how I developed the meditations later). As I guided them through these meditations, they shared a knowing and familiar connection with their ancestors that enhanced their experience of healing. The presence of ancestors in the healing journey, I discovered, helps clients feel supported, understood, and loved. Many clients had never connected with ancestors and their wisdom prior to being introduced to my meditations. I encouraged them to invite their ancestors into their daily lives and into the therapy process, and to consult with them on decisions and challenges. My clients found the new relationship beneficial and yearned to stay connected so they could learn more about and from their ancestors.	My personal experiences with ancestor healing practices increased my trust in the wisdom of our ancestors. I started using my ancestor-inspired meditations with clients (more about how I developed the meditations later). As I guided them through these meditations, they shared a knowing and familiar connection with their ancestors that enhanced their experience of healing. The presence of ancestors in the healing journey, I discovered, helps clients feel supported, understood, and loved. Many clients had never connected with ancestors and their wisdom prior to being introduced to my meditations. I encouraged them to invite their ancestors into their daily lives and into the therapy process, and to consult with them on decisions and challenges. My clients found the new relationship beneficial and yearned to stay connected so they could learn more about and from their ancestors.	Мой личный опыт практики исцеления предков усилил мою веру в мудрость наших предков. Я начал использовать медитации, вдохновленные предками, с клиентами (подробнее о том, как я разработал эти медитации, позже). Когда я проводил их через эти медитации, они разделяли знакомую и знакомую связь со своими предками, которая обогатила их опыт исцеления. Я обнаружил, что присутствие предков на пути исцеления помогает клиентам чувствовать поддержку, понимание и любовь. Многие клиенты никогда не имели дела с предками и их мудростью до того, как познакомились с моими медитациями. Я призвал их пригласить своих предков в свою повседневную жизнь и процесс терапии, а также консультироваться с ними по поводу решений и проблем. Мои клиенты находили новые отношения полезными и стремились оставаться на связи, чтобы они могли больше узнать о своих предках и от них.	My personal experiences with ancestor healing practices increased my trust in the wisdom of our ancestors. I started using my ancestor-inspired meditations with clients (more about how I developed the meditations later). As I guided them through these meditations, they shared a knowing and familiar connection with their ancestors that enhanced their experience of healing. The presence of ancestors in the healing journey, I discovered, helps clients feel supported, understood, and loved. Many clients had never connected with ancestors and their wisdom prior to being introduced to my meditations. I encouraged them to invite their ancestors into their daily lives and into the therapy process, and to consult with them on decisions and challenges. My clients found the new relationship beneficial and yearned to stay connected so they could learn more about and from their ancestors.
I also brought ancestors into the IFS healing process through legacy burden work, which I’ll describe in Chapter 11. It made sense to me, when working with traumas inherited from generational lines, that ancestors need to actively participate in the healing process. Some of the burdens passed down to my Black female clients in particular are self-reliance; the need to be strong while denying vulnerability or emotions; striving and feeling guilty for resting; a scarcity perspective believing that there’s not enough and if they stop pushing they will miss out; caretaking others and ignoring self-care; sexualization of Black women and girls; colorism; racism; and of course slavery, which is the origin of many of these legacy burdens. Ancestors have an understanding about the burdens of their line and can contribute immensely to clearing its generational burdens. Inviting the ancestors to do the work of releasing the burdens, while clients observe the process, has resulted in remarkable transformations for the clients. In this process, ancestors also let the client know the gifts or heirlooms of the line and share them with the client. A few of the heirlooms of Black ancestral lines are family loyalty, a broad definition of family including “aunties” and “cousins” based on connection in addition to blood ties, family traditions, rituals and celebrations, common sense, instinct for survival, innovation, and traditional healing. I have found that inviting the ancestors to lead the unburdening process, allowing them to do the work with the ancestral line, results in a fuller, more complete release of the burdens and a deep connection between the client and their ancestral line.	I also brought ancestors into the IFS healing process through legacy burden work, which I’ll describe in Chapter 11. It made sense to me, when working with traumas inherited from generational lines, that ancestors need to actively participate in the healing process. Some of the burdens passed down to my Black female clients in particular are self-reliance; the need to be strong while denying vulnerability or emotions; striving and feeling guilty for resting; a scarcity perspective believing that there’s not enough and if they stop pushing they will miss out; caretaking others and ignoring self-care; sexualization of Black women and girls; colorism; racism; and of course slavery, which is the origin of many of these legacy burdens. Ancestors have an understanding about the burdens of their line and can contribute immensely to clearing its generational burdens. Inviting the ancestors to do the work of releasing the burdens, while clients observe the process, has resulted in remarkable transformations for the clients. In this process, ancestors also let the client know the gifts or heirlooms of the line and share them with the client. A few of the heirlooms of Black ancestral lines are family loyalty, a broad definition of family including “aunties” and “cousins” based on connection in addition to blood ties, family traditions, rituals and celebrations, common sense, instinct for survival, innovation, and traditional healing. I have found that inviting the ancestors to lead the unburdening process, allowing them to do the work with the ancestral line, results in a fuller, more complete release of the burdens and a deep connection between the client and their ancestral line.	Я также вовлек предков в процесс исцеления IFS посредством работы с бременем наследия, которую я опишу в главе 11. При работе с травмами, унаследованными по наследственным линиям, для меня имело смысл, что предкам необходимо активно участвовать в процессе исцеления. Некоторые из бремен, возложенных на моих чернокожих клиенток, в частности, связаны с уверенностью в своих силах; потребность быть сильным, отрицая при этом уязвимость и эмоции; стремление и чувство вины за отдых; точка зрения дефицита, полагающая, что этого недостаточно, и если они перестанут давить, они упустят выгоду; забота о других и игнорирование заботы о себе; сексуализация чернокожих женщин и девочек; колоризм; расизм; и, конечно же, рабство, которое является источником многих из этих бремени наследия. Предки понимают бремя своей линии и могут внести огромный вклад в устранение бремени поколений. Приглашение предков выполнить работу по освобождению от бремени, в то время как клиенты наблюдают за процессом, привело к замечательным преобразованиям для клиентов. В этом процессе предки также сообщают клиенту о подарках или семейных реликвиях этой линии и делятся ими с клиентом. Некоторыми из семейных реликвий черных предковых линий являются семейная верность, широкое определение семьи, включая «тетушек» и «двоюродных братьев», основанное на связях, помимо кровных уз, семейных традициях, ритуалах и праздниках, здравом смысле, инстинкте выживания, инновациях. и традиционное целительство. Я обнаружил, что приглашение предков возглавить процесс облегчения бремени, позволяя им выполнять работу с наследственной линией, приводит к более полному и совершенному освобождению от бремени и глубокой связи между клиентом и его наследственной линией.	I also brought ancestors into the IFS healing process through legacy burden work, which I’ll describe in Chapter 11. It made sense to me, when working with traumas inherited from generational lines, that ancestors need to actively participate in the healing process. Some of the burdens passed down to my Black female clients in particular are self-reliance; the need to be strong while denying vulnerability or emotions; striving and feeling guilty for resting; a scarcity perspective believing that there’s not enough and if they stop pushing they will miss out; caretaking others and ignoring self-care; sexualization of Black women and girls; colorism; racism; and of course slavery, which is the origin of many of these legacy burdens. Ancestors have an understanding about the burdens of their line and can contribute immensely to clearing its generational burdens. Inviting the ancestors to do the work of releasing the burdens, while clients observe the process, has resulted in remarkable transformations for the clients. In this process, ancestors also let the client know the gifts or heirlooms of the line and share them with the client. A few of the heirlooms of Black ancestral lines are family loyalty, a broad definition of family including “aunties” and “cousins” based on connection in addition to blood ties, family traditions, rituals and celebrations, common sense, instinct for survival, innovation, and traditional healing. I have found that inviting the ancestors to lead the unburdening process, allowing them to do the work with the ancestral line, results in a fuller, more complete release of the burdens and a deep connection between the client and their ancestral line.
My first session with Jamari started with an assessment of the health of each of my primary ancestral lines: mother’s mother’s, mother’s father’s, father’s mother’s, and father’s father’s line. This assessment revealed that my mother’s mother’s line was the healthiest and the one I felt the closest to. I decided to begin to get to know the ancestors in my mother’s mother’s lineage.	My first session with Jamari started with an assessment of the health of each of my primary ancestral lines: mother’s mother’s, mother’s father’s, father’s mother’s, and father’s father’s line. This assessment revealed that my mother’s mother’s line was the healthiest and the one I felt the closest to. I decided to begin to get to know the ancestors in my mother’s mother’s lineage.	Моя первая сессия с Джамари началась с оценки здоровья каждой из моих основных родовых линий: линии матери-матери, линии отца матери, линии отца-матери и линии отца-отца. Эта оценка показала, что линия матери моей матери была самой здоровой и той, к которой я чувствовал себя ближе всего. Я решила начать знакомиться с предками по линии матери моей матери.	My first session with Jamari started with an assessment of the health of each of my primary ancestral lines: mother’s mother’s, mother’s father’s, father’s mother’s, and father’s father’s line. This assessment revealed that my mother’s mother’s line was the healthiest and the one I felt the closest to. I decided to begin to get to know the ancestors in my mother’s mother’s lineage.
When I met my Ancestor Guide on my mother’s mother’s side, she showed up tall, dark, dancing expressively with her long limbs, dressed in brightly colored yellows and oranges. Seeing her brought both joy and sadness. Joy for how well and unburdened she appeared and sadness because I, too, wished to experience the lightness of an unburdened life. I asked her for a blessing for my sadness. Her body began to move rhythmically. Although there was no music, her movements were melodic. Her hands came together at her heart several times. I interpreted what she was doing as dancing and praying. She gently corrected my impression by saying, “The dance is the prayer.”	When I met my Ancestor Guide on my mother’s mother’s side, she showed up tall, dark, dancing expressively with her long limbs, dressed in brightly colored yellows and oranges. Seeing her brought both joy and sadness. Joy for how well and unburdened she appeared and sadness because I, too, wished to experience the lightness of an unburdened life. I asked her for a blessing for my sadness. Her body began to move rhythmically. Although there was no music, her movements were melodic. Her hands came together at her heart several times. I interpreted what she was doing as dancing and praying. She gently corrected my impression by saying, “The dance is the prayer.”	Когда я встретил своего Предка-Наставника со стороны матери моей матери, она появилась высокая, смуглая, выразительно танцующая со своими длинными конечностями, одетая в яркие желтые и оранжевые одежды. Встреча с ней принесла и радость, и печаль. Радость от того, какой здоровой и необремененной она казалась, и печаль от того, что мне тоже хотелось испытать легкость необремененной жизни. Я попросил у нее благословения на мою печаль. Ее тело начало ритмично двигаться. Хотя музыки не было, ее движения были мелодичны. Ее руки несколько раз соприкасались у сердца. Я интерпретировал то, что она делала, как танец и молитву. Она мягко исправила мое впечатление, сказав: «Танец – это молитва».	When I met my Ancestor Guide on my mother’s mother’s side, she showed up tall, dark, dancing expressively with her long limbs, dressed in brightly colored yellows and oranges. Seeing her brought both joy and sadness. Joy for how well and unburdened she appeared and sadness because I, too, wished to experience the lightness of an unburdened life. I asked her for a blessing for my sadness. Her body began to move rhythmically. Although there was no music, her movements were melodic. Her hands came together at her heart several times. I interpreted what she was doing as dancing and praying. She gently corrected my impression by saying, “The dance is the prayer.”
My guide turned her attention to the healing of my unwell ancestors. She held a quilt in her hands and waved it around to capture them. Each unwell ancestor landed on a square of the quilt that represented their unwellness and became one with the quilt.	My guide turned her attention to the healing of my unwell ancestors. She held a quilt in her hands and waved it around to capture them. Each unwell ancestor landed on a square of the quilt that represented their unwellness and became one with the quilt.	Моя гидка обратила свое внимание на исцеление моих нездоровых предков. Она держала в руках одеяло и махала им, чтобы поймать их. Каждый нездоровый предок приземлился на квадрат одеяла, который символизировал его нездоровье, и стал единым целым с одеялом.	My guide turned her attention to the healing of my unwell ancestors. She held a quilt in her hands and waved it around to capture them. Each unwell ancestor landed on a square of the quilt that represented their unwellness and became one with the quilt.
I tried to share what was happening with Jamari, but the words got caught in my throat. When I attempted to speak a second time, the sound was choked back. “No need to speak to me, just be with your ancestor,” Jamari suggested gently.	I tried to share what was happening with Jamari, but the words got caught in my throat. When I attempted to speak a second time, the sound was choked back. “No need to speak to me, just be with your ancestor,” Jamari suggested gently.	Я попыталась рассказать Джамари о том, что происходит, но слова застряли у меня в горле. Когда я попытался заговорить во второй раз, звук заглох. «Не нужно говорить со мной, просто будь со своим предком», — мягко предложил Джамари.	I tried to share what was happening with Jamari, but the words got caught in my throat. When I attempted to speak a second time, the sound was choked back. “No need to speak to me, just be with your ancestor,” Jamari suggested gently.
I asked my Ancestor Guide, “Are you the one who takes my voice away?” Around that time, I was frequently losing my voice while working with clients, as often as once a week. In the middle of a session, I would get a lump in my throat that only the smallest bit of sound could move past. I’d drink water, suck throat lozenges, clear my throat, and cough, but nothing loosened the lump. I even had to end a few sessions early, motioning to my client that I couldn’t speak.	I asked my Ancestor Guide, “Are you the one who takes my voice away?” Around that time, I was frequently losing my voice while working with clients, as often as once a week. In the middle of a session, I would get a lump in my throat that only the smallest bit of sound could move past. I’d drink water, suck throat lozenges, clear my throat, and cough, but nothing loosened the lump. I even had to end a few sessions early, motioning to my client that I couldn’t speak.	Я спросил своего Предка-Наставника: «Это ты забирает мой голос?» Примерно в то время я часто терял голос во время работы с клиентами, примерно раз в неделю. В середине сеанса у меня в горле стоял комок, сквозь который мог пройти лишь малейший звук. Я пила воду, сосала леденцы от горла, прочищала горло и кашляла, но ничто не ослабляло ком. Мне даже пришлось закончить несколько сеансов раньше, жестом сообщив клиенту, что я не могу говорить.	I asked my Ancestor Guide, “Are you the one who takes my voice away?” Around that time, I was frequently losing my voice while working with clients, as often as once a week. In the middle of a session, I would get a lump in my throat that only the smallest bit of sound could move past. I’d drink water, suck throat lozenges, clear my throat, and cough, but nothing loosened the lump. I even had to end a few sessions early, motioning to my client that I couldn’t speak.
“Yes, I am the one,” my guide said. She explained that she does it to help me slow down, rest, and be. I got a sense that I would soon use my voice in a new way. She invited me into relationship with her through connecting regularly and using my hands. Lastly, she told me that the gifts of this line are peace, wisdom, artful use of the hands, and uncomplicated living.	“Yes, I am the one,” my guide said. She explained that she does it to help me slow down, rest, and be. I got a sense that I would soon use my voice in a new way. She invited me into relationship with her through connecting regularly and using my hands. Lastly, she told me that the gifts of this line are peace, wisdom, artful use of the hands, and uncomplicated living.	«Да, это я», — сказал мой гид. Она объяснила, что делает это, чтобы помочь мне замедлиться, отдохнуть и жить. У меня появилось ощущение, что скоро я буду использовать свой голос по-новому. Она пригласила меня к отношениям с ней, регулярно общаясь и используя мои руки. Наконец, она сказала мне, что дары этой линии — это мир, мудрость, искусное использование рук и несложная жизнь.	“Yes, I am the one,” my guide said. She explained that she does it to help me slow down, rest, and be. I got a sense that I would soon use my voice in a new way. She invited me into relationship with her through connecting regularly and using my hands. Lastly, she told me that the gifts of this line are peace, wisdom, artful use of the hands, and uncomplicated living.
At one point in the session, I felt an explosion of pain on the right front side of my head. She said this happens when I won’t let things go. I realized she was right; I was trying to control the process instead of allowing it to happen. She suggested that I just be. When I allowed myself to be present without the need to control, her presence intensified, and the headache subsided, replaced with a sense of peace and calm. I had experienced unbearable migraine headaches since college and undergone many treatments with varying degrees of relief. My wise ancestor gave me an age-old antidote: stop controlling, allow, and be.	At one point in the session, I felt an explosion of pain on the right front side of my head. She said this happens when I won’t let things go. I realized she was right; I was trying to control the process instead of allowing it to happen. She suggested that I just be. When I allowed myself to be present without the need to control, her presence intensified, and the headache subsided, replaced with a sense of peace and calm. I had experienced unbearable migraine headaches since college and undergone many treatments with varying degrees of relief. My wise ancestor gave me an age-old antidote: stop controlling, allow, and be.	В какой-то момент сеанса я почувствовал резкую боль в правой передней части головы. Она сказала, что такое случается, когда я не позволяю всему идти своим чередом. Я понял, что она права; Я пытался контролировать процесс, вместо того, чтобы позволить ему произойти. Она предложила мне просто быть. Когда я позволил себе присутствовать без необходимости контроля, ее присутствие усилилось, а головная боль утихла, сменившись ощущением умиротворения и покоя. Еще со времен колледжа я страдал от невыносимых мигреней и прошел множество курсов лечения с разной степенью облегчения. Мой мудрый предок дал мне древнее противоядие: перестань контролировать, позволь и будь.	At one point in the session, I felt an explosion of pain on the right front side of my head. She said this happens when I won’t let things go. I realized she was right; I was trying to control the process instead of allowing it to happen. She suggested that I just be. When I allowed myself to be present without the need to control, her presence intensified, and the headache subsided, replaced with a sense of peace and calm. I had experienced unbearable migraine headaches since college and undergone many treatments with varying degrees of relief. My wise ancestor gave me an age-old antidote: stop controlling, allow, and be.
My dancing ancestor visited me in my dreams for the next two nights. She did not speak. She danced. I was drawn into her dance, unable to take my eyes off her. I was reminded of her words, “The dance is the prayer,” and realized she is praying for me, continually.	My dancing ancestor visited me in my dreams for the next two nights. She did not speak. She danced. I was drawn into her dance, unable to take my eyes off her. I was reminded of her words, “The dance is the prayer,” and realized she is praying for me, continually.	Мой танцующий предок приходил ко мне во сне следующие две ночи. Она не говорила. Она танцевала. Я был увлечен ее танцем, не в силах оторвать от нее взгляд. Мне вспомнились ее слова: «Танец – это молитва», и я понял, что она постоянно молится за меня.	My dancing ancestor visited me in my dreams for the next two nights. She did not speak. She danced. I was drawn into her dance, unable to take my eyes off her. I was reminded of her words, “The dance is the prayer,” and realized she is praying for me, continually.
ANCESTRAL HEIRLOOMS	ANCESTRAL HEIRLOOMS	ФАМИЛИОННЫЕ РЕВИКЦИИ ПРЕДКОВ	ANCESTRAL HEIRLOOMS
One week after my first ancestral lineage healing session, Deran Young, the founder of Black Therapists Rock (BTR), invited me to lead the morning meditation at BTR’s first Heirloom Summit: Transforming Legacy Burdens to Legacy Gifts three days later. Though I had no clue what I would do in the meditation, I agreed, and then immediately went online to research meditations that involved legacy burdens and gifts for inspiration. I found a few, but none were what I was looking for. Interestingly, I did not fret, which is what I would have done prior to my ancestral healing session. I had a serene sense that it would work out fine.	One week after my first ancestral lineage healing session, Deran Young, the founder of Black Therapists Rock (BTR), invited me to lead the morning meditation at BTR’s first Heirloom Summit: Transforming Legacy Burdens to Legacy Gifts three days later. Though I had no clue what I would do in the meditation, I agreed, and then immediately went online to research meditations that involved legacy burdens and gifts for inspiration. I found a few, but none were what I was looking for. Interestingly, I did not fret, which is what I would have done prior to my ancestral healing session. I had a serene sense that it would work out fine.	Через неделю после моего первого сеанса исцеления по линии предков Деран Янг, основатель Black Therapists Rock (BTR), пригласил меня провести утреннюю медитацию на первом саммите BTR по семейным реликвиям: преобразование бремени наследия в дары наследия, три дня спустя. Хотя я понятия не имел, что буду делать во время медитации, я согласился, а затем сразу же зашел в Интернет, чтобы исследовать медитации, которые включали в себя унаследованное бремя и дары для вдохновения. Я нашел несколько, но ни один из них не был тем, что я искал. Интересно, что я не волновался, что я бы сделал до сеанса исцеления предков. У меня было безмятежное ощущение, что все будет хорошо.	One week after my first ancestral lineage healing session, Deran Young, the founder of Black Therapists Rock (BTR), invited me to lead the morning meditation at BTR’s first Heirloom Summit: Transforming Legacy Burdens to Legacy Gifts three days later. Though I had no clue what I would do in the meditation, I agreed, and then immediately went online to research meditations that involved legacy burdens and gifts for inspiration. I found a few, but none were what I was looking for. Interestingly, I did not fret, which is what I would have done prior to my ancestral healing session. I had a serene sense that it would work out fine.
A group of ancestors came to me in a dream that night. The dancing ancestor was not one of them. These ancestors knew my need and generously shared a guided imagery meditation. When I had created meditations in the past, I experienced meditation from the outside, as a viewer and creator of what was happening. This time, my ancestors gifted the meditation as a firsthand experience from within the guided imagery. I was the main character. Instead of watching the meditation unfold, I was inside the meditation, experiencing it visually, tactilely, fragrantly, emotionally, auditorily. The dreamer and the dreamed merged. In my over 30 years of meditating, it was the most vibrant, tangible, and heartfelt experience I have ever had.	A group of ancestors came to me in a dream that night. The dancing ancestor was not one of them. These ancestors knew my need and generously shared a guided imagery meditation. When I had created meditations in the past, I experienced meditation from the outside, as a viewer and creator of what was happening. This time, my ancestors gifted the meditation as a firsthand experience from within the guided imagery. I was the main character. Instead of watching the meditation unfold, I was inside the meditation, experiencing it visually, tactilely, fragrantly, emotionally, auditorily. The dreamer and the dreamed merged. In my over 30 years of meditating, it was the most vibrant, tangible, and heartfelt experience I have ever had.	В ту ночь ко мне во сне пришла группа предков. Танцующий предок не был одним из них. Эти предки знали о моих нуждах и щедро поделились управляемой образной медитацией. Когда я создавал медитации в прошлом, я переживал медитацию со стороны, как зритель и творец происходящего. На этот раз мои предки подарили медитацию как непосредственный опыт, полученный с помощью управляемых образов. Я был главным героем. Вместо того, чтобы наблюдать, как разворачивается медитация, я находился внутри медитации, переживая ее визуально, тактильно, ароматно, эмоционально, слухово. Мечтатель и мечта слились воедино. За более чем 30 лет медитации это был самый яркий, осязаемый и душевный опыт, который я когда-либо испытывал.	A group of ancestors came to me in a dream that night. The dancing ancestor was not one of them. These ancestors knew my need and generously shared a guided imagery meditation. When I had created meditations in the past, I experienced meditation from the outside, as a viewer and creator of what was happening. This time, my ancestors gifted the meditation as a firsthand experience from within the guided imagery. I was the main character. Instead of watching the meditation unfold, I was inside the meditation, experiencing it visually, tactilely, fragrantly, emotionally, auditorily. The dreamer and the dreamed merged. In my over 30 years of meditating, it was the most vibrant, tangible, and heartfelt experience I have ever had.
When I woke, I knew this was the Summit meditation. I transcribed it with the guidance of my ancestors, who stood close behind me. They provided gentle nudges for correction when I got an idea or word wrong. At times, they assisted me in re-experiencing the meditation to truly capture the essence. The significance of my ancestors gifting me with the meditation for a Summit on Legacy Burdens and Legacy Gifts is not lost on me. I am immensely grateful to them for showing up when I had no idea what I would do a mere three days before the event.	When I woke, I knew this was the Summit meditation. I transcribed it with the guidance of my ancestors, who stood close behind me. They provided gentle nudges for correction when I got an idea or word wrong. At times, they assisted me in re-experiencing the meditation to truly capture the essence. The significance of my ancestors gifting me with the meditation for a Summit on Legacy Burdens and Legacy Gifts is not lost on me. I am immensely grateful to them for showing up when I had no idea what I would do a mere three days before the event.	Когда я проснулся, я знал, что это медитация Саммита. Я переписал его под руководством моих предков, которые стояли рядом со мной. Они мягко подталкивали меня к исправлению, когда я неправильно понимал идею или слово. Иногда они помогали мне заново пережить медитацию, чтобы по-настоящему уловить суть. Значимость того, что мои предки подарили мне медитацию для Саммита по бремени наследия и дарам наследия, не ускользнула от меня. Я безмерно благодарен им за то, что они появились, когда я еще за три дня до мероприятия понятия не имел, чем буду заниматься.	When I woke, I knew this was the Summit meditation. I transcribed it with the guidance of my ancestors, who stood close behind me. They provided gentle nudges for correction when I got an idea or word wrong. At times, they assisted me in re-experiencing the meditation to truly capture the essence. The significance of my ancestors gifting me with the meditation for a Summit on Legacy Burdens and Legacy Gifts is not lost on me. I am immensely grateful to them for showing up when I had no idea what I would do a mere three days before the event.
The meditation wasn’t the only gift I received that night. They declared that this meditation would be included in a book of IFS-inspired guided imagery meditations that I would eventually publish. They went on to assure me that they will assist me every step of the way. I was instructed that I should not distribute the meditations in written or recorded form yet—I should save them for the book—but I could lead people through them verbally. My excitement brimmed over, as this felt so deeply in line with my purpose.	The meditation wasn’t the only gift I received that night. They declared that this meditation would be included in a book of IFS-inspired guided imagery meditations that I would eventually publish. They went on to assure me that they will assist me every step of the way. I was instructed that I should not distribute the meditations in written or recorded form yet—I should save them for the book—but I could lead people through them verbally. My excitement brimmed over, as this felt so deeply in line with my purpose.	Медитация была не единственным подарком, который я получил в ту ночь. Они заявили, что эта медитация будет включена в книгу управляемых образных медитаций, вдохновленных IFS, которую я в конечном итоге опубликую. Они заверили меня, что будут помогать мне на каждом этапе пути. Меня проинструктировали, что мне пока не следует распространять медитации в письменной или записанной форме — мне следует сохранить их для книги, — но я могу вести людей через них устно. Мое волнение переполняло меня, поскольку это очень соответствовало моей цели.	The meditation wasn’t the only gift I received that night. They declared that this meditation would be included in a book of IFS-inspired guided imagery meditations that I would eventually publish. They went on to assure me that they will assist me every step of the way. I was instructed that I should not distribute the meditations in written or recorded form yet—I should save them for the book—but I could lead people through them verbally. My excitement brimmed over, as this felt so deeply in line with my purpose.
The Cabin with the Ancestor meditation went exceptionally well at the Summit. I shared with the group how my ancestors transported me in my dream state to the world where this meditation takes place and supported the transfer of the experience into the written word. The feedback I received included words like wonderful and amazing, and phrases like I felt so connected to my ancestors. It felt so real. I also got many comments expressing gratitude and appreciation for the meditation. One of the most meaningful compliments came when Dr. Richard Schwartz told me he had enjoyed it. “Be sure to remain connected to your ancestors,” he said. I was moved by three participants of the training reaching out to request a copy of the meditation, one saying she wanted to use it in an IFS training where she would discuss legacy burdens and the other two hoping to use it to continue the dialogue with their ancestors. Unfortunately, I had to say not yet to the distribution of the meditation; I wanted to honor my ancestors’ promise that it would become part of a book.	The Cabin with the Ancestor meditation went exceptionally well at the Summit. I shared with the group how my ancestors transported me in my dream state to the world where this meditation takes place and supported the transfer of the experience into the written word. The feedback I received included words like wonderful and amazing, and phrases like I felt so connected to my ancestors. It felt so real. I also got many comments expressing gratitude and appreciation for the meditation. One of the most meaningful compliments came when Dr. Richard Schwartz told me he had enjoyed it. “Be sure to remain connected to your ancestors,” he said. I was moved by three participants of the training reaching out to request a copy of the meditation, one saying she wanted to use it in an IFS training where she would discuss legacy burdens and the other two hoping to use it to continue the dialogue with their ancestors. Unfortunately, I had to say not yet to the distribution of the meditation; I wanted to honor my ancestors’ promise that it would become part of a book.	Медитация «Хижина с Предком» прошла на Саммите исключительно хорошо. Я рассказал группе, как мои предки перенесли меня в состоянии сна в мир, где происходит эта медитация, и поддержали передачу этого опыта в письменное слово. Отзывы, которые я получил, включали такие слова, как «чудесный» и «удивительный», а также фразы о том, что я чувствовал себя очень связанным со своими предками. Это было так реально. Я также получил много комментариев, выражающих благодарность и признательность за медитацию. Один из самых значимых комплиментов был сделан, когда доктор Ричард Шварц сказал мне, что ему это понравилось. «Обязательно сохраняйте связь со своими предками», — сказал он. Меня тронули три участницы тренинга, которые попросили копию медитации: одна сказала, что хочет использовать ее на тренинге IFS, где она будет обсуждать бремя наследия, а двое других надеялись использовать ее для продолжения диалога со своими предки. К сожалению, мне пришлось пока сказать не о распространении медитации; Я хотел выполнить обещание моих предков, что это станет частью книги.	The Cabin with the Ancestor meditation went exceptionally well at the Summit. I shared with the group how my ancestors transported me in my dream state to the world where this meditation takes place and supported the transfer of the experience into the written word. The feedback I received included words like wonderful and amazing, and phrases like I felt so connected to my ancestors. It felt so real. I also got many comments expressing gratitude and appreciation for the meditation. One of the most meaningful compliments came when Dr. Richard Schwartz told me he had enjoyed it. “Be sure to remain connected to your ancestors,” he said. I was moved by three participants of the training reaching out to request a copy of the meditation, one saying she wanted to use it in an IFS training where she would discuss legacy burdens and the other two hoping to use it to continue the dialogue with their ancestors. Unfortunately, I had to say not yet to the distribution of the meditation; I wanted to honor my ancestors’ promise that it would become part of a book.
The night after the success of the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation, my ancestors came to me in a dream proclaiming themselves my Writing Clan. They joined together to assist me in creating nine additional meditations, which you’ll find in this book. The Writing Clan came to me in times of rest, usually as I was falling asleep, in the twilight hours prior to waking, during my morning meditation, or as I sat simply being. In those times, as with the first meditation, I entered the world of the meditation with my ancestor guides. The meditation offerings continued for six months. Then, after delivering the meditation I call Labyrinth with the Elders, the Writing Clan went silent. However, I had several meditations already given me that I hadn’t transcribed from the notes I always jotted down at the end of the meditation session. Together with the Writing Clan, I completed the unfinished meditations. Although the Clan never explicitly told me we were complete, I knew it intuitively. These are the meditations that make up this book, along with three meditations that were created without the assistance of my ancestors: Qualities of Self, Be With, and Trailblazers.	The night after the success of the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation, my ancestors came to me in a dream proclaiming themselves my Writing Clan. They joined together to assist me in creating nine additional meditations, which you’ll find in this book. The Writing Clan came to me in times of rest, usually as I was falling asleep, in the twilight hours prior to waking, during my morning meditation, or as I sat simply being. In those times, as with the first meditation, I entered the world of the meditation with my ancestor guides. The meditation offerings continued for six months. Then, after delivering the meditation I call Labyrinth with the Elders, the Writing Clan went silent. However, I had several meditations already given me that I hadn’t transcribed from the notes I always jotted down at the end of the meditation session. Together with the Writing Clan, I completed the unfinished meditations. Although the Clan never explicitly told me we were complete, I knew it intuitively. These are the meditations that make up this book, along with three meditations that were created without the assistance of my ancestors: Qualities of Self, Be With, and Trailblazers.	В ночь после успеха Хижины с медитацией Предка мои предки пришли ко мне во сне и провозгласили себя моим Писающим Кланом. Они объединились, чтобы помочь мне создать девять дополнительных медитаций, которые вы найдете в этой книге. Клан Писателей приходил ко мне во время отдыха, обычно когда я засыпал, в сумеречные часы перед пробуждением, во время утренней медитации или когда я просто сидел. В те времена, как и во время первой медитации, я вошел в мир медитации вместе со своими наставниками-предками. Подношения медитации продолжались шесть месяцев. Затем, после проведения медитации, которую я называю Лабиринтом со Старейшинами, Клан Писателей замолчал. Однако у меня уже было несколько медитаций, которые я не расшифровал из заметок, которые я всегда записывал в конце сеанса медитации. Вместе с Кланом Писателей я завершил незавершенные медитации. Хотя Клан никогда прямо не говорил мне, что мы завершены, я знал это интуитивно. Именно эти медитации составляют эту книгу, а также три медитации, созданные без помощи моих предков: «Качества себя», «Быть ​​с» и «Первопроходцы».	The night after the success of the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation, my ancestors came to me in a dream proclaiming themselves my Writing Clan. They joined together to assist me in creating nine additional meditations, which you’ll find in this book. The Writing Clan came to me in times of rest, usually as I was falling asleep, in the twilight hours prior to waking, during my morning meditation, or as I sat simply being. In those times, as with the first meditation, I entered the world of the meditation with my ancestor guides. The meditation offerings continued for six months. Then, after delivering the meditation I call Labyrinth with the Elders, the Writing Clan went silent. However, I had several meditations already given me that I hadn’t transcribed from the notes I always jotted down at the end of the meditation session. Together with the Writing Clan, I completed the unfinished meditations. Although the Clan never explicitly told me we were complete, I knew it intuitively. These are the meditations that make up this book, along with three meditations that were created without the assistance of my ancestors: Qualities of Self, Be With, and Trailblazers.
My dancing ancestor reappeared in my dream that night too. She came to show me that she had started taking my speaking voice as a therapist away to replace it with my written voice, and that I would use my hands in this effort in the same way my ancestors did as quilters, tillers of soil, cultivators of gardens, and crafters of things to sell. The magnificence of this dream is that it showed scenes from the past when I had lost my voice and the ways I would use my written voice in the future. Like a movie, I saw myself in various stages of writing a book, longhand with paper and pen, typing on a laptop, researching, and reading source material. In juxtaposition, my ancestors were displayed across the screen using their hands to create, which clarified the connection between the use of my hands and theirs for creation. I feel a deep kinship with the ancestors of my mother’s mother’s line, women I never knew personally but know intimately by their significant influence in my life. The dance that night was one of celebration and prayer for my acceptance of the meditations and willingness to transform into a written-word healer.	My dancing ancestor reappeared in my dream that night too. She came to show me that she had started taking my speaking voice as a therapist away to replace it with my written voice, and that I would use my hands in this effort in the same way my ancestors did as quilters, tillers of soil, cultivators of gardens, and crafters of things to sell. The magnificence of this dream is that it showed scenes from the past when I had lost my voice and the ways I would use my written voice in the future. Like a movie, I saw myself in various stages of writing a book, longhand with paper and pen, typing on a laptop, researching, and reading source material. In juxtaposition, my ancestors were displayed across the screen using their hands to create, which clarified the connection between the use of my hands and theirs for creation. I feel a deep kinship with the ancestors of my mother’s mother’s line, women I never knew personally but know intimately by their significant influence in my life. The dance that night was one of celebration and prayer for my acceptance of the meditations and willingness to transform into a written-word healer.	Той ночью мой танцующий предок снова появился во сне. Она пришла, чтобы показать мне, что она начала забирать мой разговорный голос как терапевт, чтобы заменить его письменным голосом, и что я буду использовать свои руки в этом усилии так же, как мои предки, работая стегальщиками, земледельцами, земледельцами. садов и мастеров вещей на продажу. Великолепие этого сна в том, что он показал сцены из прошлого, когда я потерял голос, и то, как я буду использовать свой письменный голос в будущем. Как в кино, я видел себя на разных этапах написания книги, от руки с бумагой и ручкой, печатания на ноутбуке, исследования и чтения исходных материалов. Напротив, мои предки были показаны на экране, используя свои руки для творчества, что прояснило связь между использованием моих и их рук для творчества. Я чувствую глубокое родство с предками по материнской линии моей матери, женщинами, которых я никогда не знал лично, но знаю близко по их значительному влиянию на мою жизнь. Танец в тот вечер был празднованием и молитвой за мое согласие с медитациями и желание превратиться в письменного целителя.	My dancing ancestor reappeared in my dream that night too. She came to show me that she had started taking my speaking voice as a therapist away to replace it with my written voice, and that I would use my hands in this effort in the same way my ancestors did as quilters, tillers of soil, cultivators of gardens, and crafters of things to sell. The magnificence of this dream is that it showed scenes from the past when I had lost my voice and the ways I would use my written voice in the future. Like a movie, I saw myself in various stages of writing a book, longhand with paper and pen, typing on a laptop, researching, and reading source material. In juxtaposition, my ancestors were displayed across the screen using their hands to create, which clarified the connection between the use of my hands and theirs for creation. I feel a deep kinship with the ancestors of my mother’s mother’s line, women I never knew personally but know intimately by their significant influence in my life. The dance that night was one of celebration and prayer for my acceptance of the meditations and willingness to transform into a written-word healer.
FOLLOWING ANCESTOR INSPIRATIONS	FOLLOWING ANCESTOR INSPIRATIONS	ПО ВДОХНОВЕНИЮ ПРЕДКОВ	FOLLOWING ANCESTOR INSPIRATIONS
I want to speak to the importance of adhering to ancestor inspirations. After sharing the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation at the Summit, I went on to share it in IFS Level 1 trainings as I advanced from program assistant to solo lead trainer. Many people who experienced it suggested that I make the meditations available in an audio recording. I had offers of help and suggestions of quick ways to create the audio. I jumped into the project fully.	I want to speak to the importance of adhering to ancestor inspirations. After sharing the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation at the Summit, I went on to share it in IFS Level 1 trainings as I advanced from program assistant to solo lead trainer. Many people who experienced it suggested that I make the meditations available in an audio recording. I had offers of help and suggestions of quick ways to create the audio. I jumped into the project fully.	Я хочу поговорить о важности следования вдохновению предков. После того, как я поделился Хитиной с медитацией Предка на Саммите, я продолжил делиться ею на тренингах IFS Уровня 1, пройдя путь от ассистента программы до индивидуального ведущего тренера. Многие люди, пережившие это, предлагали мне сделать медитации доступными в аудиозаписи. Мне предлагали помощь и предлагали быстрые способы создания аудио. Я полностью погрузился в проект.	I want to speak to the importance of adhering to ancestor inspirations. After sharing the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation at the Summit, I went on to share it in IFS Level 1 trainings as I advanced from program assistant to solo lead trainer. Many people who experienced it suggested that I make the meditations available in an audio recording. I had offers of help and suggestions of quick ways to create the audio. I jumped into the project fully.
A consulting client of mine who was a partner in a publishing enterprise wanted to bring me on as an author. I shared my desire to create an audio of the meditations, and she was enthusiastic. I submitted a proposal, but the process stalled multiple times. About six months in I was still without a contract. Finally, my client came to me with the news that she had left the publishing company partnership due to irreconcilable differences. She told me she still believed in the project and offered to pass it on to an editor at Hay House. She made no promises, but she wished me success.	A consulting client of mine who was a partner in a publishing enterprise wanted to bring me on as an author. I shared my desire to create an audio of the meditations, and she was enthusiastic. I submitted a proposal, but the process stalled multiple times. About six months in I was still without a contract. Finally, my client came to me with the news that she had left the publishing company partnership due to irreconcilable differences. She told me she still believed in the project and offered to pass it on to an editor at Hay House. She made no promises, but she wished me success.	Мой клиент-консультант, который был партнером издательского предприятия, хотел привлечь меня в качестве автора. Я поделился своим желанием записать медитации на аудио, и она была полна энтузиазма. Я подал предложение, но процесс несколько раз останавливался. Около полугода я все еще был без контракта. Наконец, моя клиентка пришла ко мне с известием о том, что она вышла из партнерства издательства из-за непримиримых разногласий. Она сказала мне, что все еще верит в этот проект, и предложила передать его редактору Hay House. Она ничего не обещала, но пожелала мне успехов.	A consulting client of mine who was a partner in a publishing enterprise wanted to bring me on as an author. I shared my desire to create an audio of the meditations, and she was enthusiastic. I submitted a proposal, but the process stalled multiple times. About six months in I was still without a contract. Finally, my client came to me with the news that she had left the publishing company partnership due to irreconcilable differences. She told me she still believed in the project and offered to pass it on to an editor at Hay House. She made no promises, but she wished me success.
I had a Zoom call with an acquisitions editor at Hay House in September. The editor acknowledged my desire to create an audio but asked if I would consider writing a book instead. I was surprised by this reminder; I had pursued the vision of creating an audio so vigorously that I had lost sight of my ancestors’ promise that there would be a book. I said yes, I was definitely interested in writing a book, and immediately started working on a book proposal.	I had a Zoom call with an acquisitions editor at Hay House in September. The editor acknowledged my desire to create an audio but asked if I would consider writing a book instead. I was surprised by this reminder; I had pursued the vision of creating an audio so vigorously that I had lost sight of my ancestors’ promise that there would be a book. I said yes, I was definitely interested in writing a book, and immediately started working on a book proposal.	В сентябре у меня был звонок через Zoom с редактором отдела закупок Hay House. Редактор признал мое желание создать аудио, но спросил, не рассмотрю ли я вместо этого возможность написать книгу. Меня удивило это напоминание; Я так энергично преследовал идею создания аудио, что упустил из виду обещание моих предков о том, что будет книга. Я сказал да, мне определенно интересно написать книгу, и сразу же начал работать над предложением книги.	I had a Zoom call with an acquisitions editor at Hay House in September. The editor acknowledged my desire to create an audio but asked if I would consider writing a book instead. I was surprised by this reminder; I had pursued the vision of creating an audio so vigorously that I had lost sight of my ancestors’ promise that there would be a book. I said yes, I was definitely interested in writing a book, and immediately started working on a book proposal.
I had followed the audio path because it was what people in the IFS community were requesting. But I didn’t hear from the Writing Clan once while I was pursuing the project in audio form. Now my ancestors returned after a year of silence in honor of their word to support my writing process, and together we created a proposal I felt proud of. I pressed Send on the e-mail to the editor on October 12, and 20 days later, I got an e-mail with a subject line that read, “Hay House Offer.” At the time, I was on a transatlantic crossing from London back to the United States. I couldn’t think of a more beautiful place and time to receive the news.	I had followed the audio path because it was what people in the IFS community were requesting. But I didn’t hear from the Writing Clan once while I was pursuing the project in audio form. Now my ancestors returned after a year of silence in honor of their word to support my writing process, and together we created a proposal I felt proud of. I pressed Send on the e-mail to the editor on October 12, and 20 days later, I got an e-mail with a subject line that read, “Hay House Offer.” At the time, I was on a transatlantic crossing from London back to the United States. I couldn’t think of a more beautiful place and time to receive the news.	Я пошел по аудиопути, потому что это было то, что просили люди в сообществе IFS. Но я ни разу не услышал от Писательного клана, пока работал над проектом в аудиоформате. Теперь мои предки вернулись после года молчания в честь своего слова поддержать мой писательский процесс, и вместе мы создали предложение, которым я горжусь. Я нажал «Отправить» в электронном письме редактору от 12 октября, а 20 дней спустя я получил электронное письмо с темой «Предложение Hay House». В то время я совершал трансатлантический переход из Лондона обратно в Соединенные Штаты. Я не мог придумать более красивого места и времени, чтобы получить новости.	I had followed the audio path because it was what people in the IFS community were requesting. But I didn’t hear from the Writing Clan once while I was pursuing the project in audio form. Now my ancestors returned after a year of silence in honor of their word to support my writing process, and together we created a proposal I felt proud of. I pressed Send on the e-mail to the editor on October 12, and 20 days later, I got an e-mail with a subject line that read, “Hay House Offer.” At the time, I was on a transatlantic crossing from London back to the United States. I couldn’t think of a more beautiful place and time to receive the news.
I share this part of my journey to illuminate the difference between being on purpose with the inspiration of ancestors and acting in my own strength. When I pursued a quick way to get the meditations published that met the needs of my beloved IFS community, the project was stalled with no forward movement and ultimately aborted six months later. When I was in alignment with the inspiration of my ancestors, the first step of their promise of a book was realized in a mere four months after my work first came to the attention of Hay House.	I share this part of my journey to illuminate the difference between being on purpose with the inspiration of ancestors and acting in my own strength. When I pursued a quick way to get the meditations published that met the needs of my beloved IFS community, the project was stalled with no forward movement and ultimately aborted six months later. When I was in alignment with the inspiration of my ancestors, the first step of their promise of a book was realized in a mere four months after my work first came to the attention of Hay House.	Я делюсь этой частью своего пути, чтобы осветить разницу между намерением действовать по вдохновению предков и действовать собственными силами. Когда я искал быстрый способ опубликовать медитации, отвечающие потребностям моего любимого сообщества IFS, проект застопорился без какого-либо продвижения вперед и в конечном итоге был прерван шесть месяцев спустя. Когда я следовал вдохновению своих предков, первый шаг их обещания создать книгу был реализован всего за четыре месяца после того, как моя работа впервые попала в поле зрения Hay House.	I share this part of my journey to illuminate the difference between being on purpose with the inspiration of ancestors and acting in my own strength. When I pursued a quick way to get the meditations published that met the needs of my beloved IFS community, the project was stalled with no forward movement and ultimately aborted six months later. When I was in alignment with the inspiration of my ancestors, the first step of their promise of a book was realized in a mere four months after my work first came to the attention of Hay House.
The work of ancestral healing and connection is not magic, although it can feel and appear that way. I liken it to my relationship with my children. As a mom, I worked to meet most of my kids’ needs and many of their wants. They did not have to worry about where food, water, electricity, clothes, etc., would come from or if they would come. My husband and I provided for them out of love, responsibility, and care. Our ancestors are the same way. As an attuned parent, I anticipate or see a need and respond; when we connect with our ancestors, they do the same. They love and care about us and what we care about. They support us in cultivating the gifts of our ancestral lines. Just as my ancestors were waiting to connect and assist, yours are too.	The work of ancestral healing and connection is not magic, although it can feel and appear that way. I liken it to my relationship with my children. As a mom, I worked to meet most of my kids’ needs and many of their wants. They did not have to worry about where food, water, electricity, clothes, etc., would come from or if they would come. My husband and I provided for them out of love, responsibility, and care. Our ancestors are the same way. As an attuned parent, I anticipate or see a need and respond; when we connect with our ancestors, they do the same. They love and care about us and what we care about. They support us in cultivating the gifts of our ancestral lines. Just as my ancestors were waiting to connect and assist, yours are too.	Работа по исцелению предков и установлению связи не является магией, хотя она может так ощущаться и выглядеть. Я сравниваю это с моими отношениями с детьми. Как мама, я работала, чтобы удовлетворить большинство потребностей моих детей и многие их желания. Им не нужно было беспокоиться о том, откуда возьмут еду, воду, электричество, одежду и т. д. и придут ли они. Мы с мужем обеспечивали их из любви, ответственности и заботы. Наши предки такие же. Как настроенный родитель, я предчувствую или вижу потребность и реагирую; когда мы связываемся с нашими предками, они делают то же самое. Они любят и заботятся о нас и о том, что нам важно. Они поддерживают нас в развитии даров наших предков. Точно так же, как мои предки ждали возможности связаться и помочь, ваши тоже.	The work of ancestral healing and connection is not magic, although it can feel and appear that way. I liken it to my relationship with my children. As a mom, I worked to meet most of my kids’ needs and many of their wants. They did not have to worry about where food, water, electricity, clothes, etc., would come from or if they would come. My husband and I provided for them out of love, responsibility, and care. Our ancestors are the same way. As an attuned parent, I anticipate or see a need and respond; when we connect with our ancestors, they do the same. They love and care about us and what we care about. They support us in cultivating the gifts of our ancestral lines. Just as my ancestors were waiting to connect and assist, yours are too.
What I hope to offer you through the reading of this book is a return to the sacredness of your essential Self to affirm those parts of yourself you had to hide to gain acceptance, love, and care. I hope that through this work you grow to courageously and unapologetically express the whole of who you are. The healing I hope for you will come through the relationships you build with your parts and ancestors. Through the principles, exercises, tools, and meditations, you will learn your internal system. This includes building a trusting relationship with your parts, which will decrease their extreme behaviors and help you discover that you can heal them. I also hope to increase your access to Self by inviting your ancestors into your healing work with you.	What I hope to offer you through the reading of this book is a return to the sacredness of your essential Self to affirm those parts of yourself you had to hide to gain acceptance, love, and care. I hope that through this work you grow to courageously and unapologetically express the whole of who you are. The healing I hope for you will come through the relationships you build with your parts and ancestors. Through the principles, exercises, tools, and meditations, you will learn your internal system. This includes building a trusting relationship with your parts, which will decrease their extreme behaviors and help you discover that you can heal them. I also hope to increase your access to Self by inviting your ancestors into your healing work with you.	Читая эту книгу, я надеюсь предложить вам возвращение к святости вашего сущностного «Я», чтобы утвердить те части себя, которые вам приходилось скрывать, чтобы получить признание, любовь и заботу. Я надеюсь, что благодаря этой работе вы научитесь смело и без извинений выражать всю свою сущность. Исцеление, которое, я надеюсь, придет к вам через отношения, которые вы строите со своими частями тела и предками. С помощью принципов, упражнений, инструментов и медитаций вы изучите свою внутреннюю систему. Это включает в себя построение доверительных отношений со своими частями тела, что уменьшит их экстремальное поведение и поможет вам обнаружить, что вы можете их исцелить. Я также надеюсь расширить ваш доступ к Самости, приглашая ваших предков участвовать в вашей целительской работе вместе с вами.	What I hope to offer you through the reading of this book is a return to the sacredness of your essential Self to affirm those parts of yourself you had to hide to gain acceptance, love, and care. I hope that through this work you grow to courageously and unapologetically express the whole of who you are. The healing I hope for you will come through the relationships you build with your parts and ancestors. Through the principles, exercises, tools, and meditations, you will learn your internal system. This includes building a trusting relationship with your parts, which will decrease their extreme behaviors and help you discover that you can heal them. I also hope to increase your access to Self by inviting your ancestors into your healing work with you.
SIX ASSUMPTIONS	SIX ASSUMPTIONS	ШЕСТЬ ПРЕДПОЛОЖЕНИЙ	SIX ASSUMPTIONS
Richard Schwartz’s work on IFS identifies six assumptions that are foundational to the work we’ll do together in this book.6 As you work with your parts, hold each of these assumptions as truth. It will help support you as you get to know your parts.	Richard Schwartz’s work on IFS identifies six assumptions that are foundational to the work we’ll do together in this book.6 As you work with your parts, hold each of these assumptions as truth. It will help support you as you get to know your parts.	В работе Ричарда Шварца над IFS выделены шесть предположений, которые лежат в основе нашей совместной работы в этой книге.6 Работая над своими частями, воспринимайте каждое из этих предположений как истину. Это поможет вам, когда вы познакомитесь со своими деталями.	Richard Schwartz’s work on IFS identifies six assumptions that are foundational to the work we’ll do together in this book.6 As you work with your parts, hold each of these assumptions as truth. It will help support you as you get to know your parts.
Assumption 1: We all have parts	Assumption 1: We all have parts	Предположение 1: У всех нас есть части	Assumption 1: We all have parts
The model asserts that we all have parts. I have parts. You have parts. Even if we aren’t aware of them, we still have parts. Have you ever had the experience of being of two minds or more on a topic or situation? For example, with the possibility of a job promotion, you may hear a voice say, “You’re not qualified; you’re not ready.” And another says, “You’ve worked hard and earned this.” One part will tell you, show you, and even provide examples from your past about how qualified you are and what you’ve done to prepare for the promotion. While another part will have a strong stance that you will fail if you take the promotion, and it, too, will give reasons from your past and/or unforeseen future dangers to support why you are not ready. This is an example of how parts may show themselves within your internal system.	The model asserts that we all have parts. I have parts. You have parts. Even if we aren’t aware of them, we still have parts. Have you ever had the experience of being of two minds or more on a topic or situation? For example, with the possibility of a job promotion, you may hear a voice say, “You’re not qualified; you’re not ready.” And another says, “You’ve worked hard and earned this.” One part will tell you, show you, and even provide examples from your past about how qualified you are and what you’ve done to prepare for the promotion. While another part will have a strong stance that you will fail if you take the promotion, and it, too, will give reasons from your past and/or unforeseen future dangers to support why you are not ready. This is an example of how parts may show themselves within your internal system.	Модель утверждает, что у всех нас есть части. У меня есть запчасти. У вас есть части. Даже если мы о них не знаем, у нас все равно есть части. Был ли у вас когда-нибудь опыт раздвоения или более мнений по поводу какой-либо темы или ситуации? Например, при возможности продвижения по службе вы можете услышать голос: «Вы недостаточно квалифицированы; ты не готов». А другой говорит: «Вы много работали и заслужили это». Одна часть расскажет вам, покажет и даже приведет примеры из вашего прошлого о том, насколько вы квалифицированы и что вы сделали для подготовки к повышению. В то время как другая часть будет твердо убеждена, что вы потерпите неудачу, если пойдете на повышение, и она также будет приводить причины из вашего прошлого и/или непредвиденных будущих опасностей, подтверждающие, почему вы не готовы. Это пример того, как детали могут проявлять себя внутри вашей внутренней системы.	The model asserts that we all have parts. I have parts. You have parts. Even if we aren’t aware of them, we still have parts. Have you ever had the experience of being of two minds or more on a topic or situation? For example, with the possibility of a job promotion, you may hear a voice say, “You’re not qualified; you’re not ready.” And another says, “You’ve worked hard and earned this.” One part will tell you, show you, and even provide examples from your past about how qualified you are and what you’ve done to prepare for the promotion. While another part will have a strong stance that you will fail if you take the promotion, and it, too, will give reasons from your past and/or unforeseen future dangers to support why you are not ready. This is an example of how parts may show themselves within your internal system.
Assumption 2: Parts are forced into extreme roles	Assumption 2: Parts are forced into extreme roles	Предположение 2: Детали вынуждены играть крайние роли.	Assumption 2: Parts are forced into extreme roles
Parts have been forced into unnatural roles due to attachment wounds and/or trauma. Gina Ryder, an educator and journalist, defines the origin of attachment trauma as “a rupture in the bonding process between a child and their primary caregiver.”7 When our needs are not understood or met as children, or we experience abuse and/or trauma, parts take on extreme roles to protect us from the pain we previously experienced. Our parts may be activated with even the slightest provocation. If a situation is the least bit like the original one, parts will respond with intensity as if they are protecting us from the initial pain. Parts can express themselves extremely through emotions, such as rage or sadness, somatically through migraine headaches or nausea, with images in vivid dreams or horrifying nightmares or through beliefs like “I’m not good enough.”	Parts have been forced into unnatural roles due to attachment wounds and/or trauma. Gina Ryder, an educator and journalist, defines the origin of attachment trauma as “a rupture in the bonding process between a child and their primary caregiver.”7 When our needs are not understood or met as children, or we experience abuse and/or trauma, parts take on extreme roles to protect us from the pain we previously experienced. Our parts may be activated with even the slightest provocation. If a situation is the least bit like the original one, parts will respond with intensity as if they are protecting us from the initial pain. Parts can express themselves extremely through emotions, such as rage or sadness, somatically through migraine headaches or nausea, with images in vivid dreams or horrifying nightmares or through beliefs like “I’m not good enough.”	Детали были вынуждены играть неестественную роль из-за прикрепленных ран и/или травм. Джина Райдер, педагог и журналист, определяет причину травмы привязанности как «разрыв в процессе установления связи между ребенком и его основным опекуном». В результате травмы части берут на себя экстремальную роль, защищая нас от боли, которую мы испытывали ранее. Наши части могут быть активированы даже при малейшей провокации. Если ситуация хотя бы немного похожа на исходную, части будут реагировать интенсивно, как будто они защищают нас от первоначальной боли. Части могут выражать себя исключительно через эмоции, такие как ярость или печаль, соматически через мигрень или тошноту, с помощью образов в ярких снах или ужасающих кошмарах или через убеждения типа «Я недостаточно хорош».	Parts have been forced into unnatural roles due to attachment wounds and/or trauma. Gina Ryder, an educator and journalist, defines the origin of attachment trauma as “a rupture in the bonding process between a child and their primary caregiver.”7 When our needs are not understood or met as children, or we experience abuse and/or trauma, parts take on extreme roles to protect us from the pain we previously experienced. Our parts may be activated with even the slightest provocation. If a situation is the least bit like the original one, parts will respond with intensity as if they are protecting us from the initial pain. Parts can express themselves extremely through emotions, such as rage or sadness, somatically through migraine headaches or nausea, with images in vivid dreams or horrifying nightmares or through beliefs like “I’m not good enough.”
Assumption 3: All parts are welcome	Assumption 3: All parts are welcome	Предположение 3: Все части приветствуются	Assumption 3: All parts are welcome
Are all parts welcome? What about parts that hurt people or do bad things? IFS holds that all parts are welcome within an internal system that chooses to understand and get to know each of the parts. It is only through relationship with our parts that we can welcome them. Relationship builds trust. As trust deepens, our parts will share their experiences with us. We welcome our parts by being with them and validating their experiences as they share who they are. We say there are no bad parts. But parts do engage poor strategies to get their needs met.	Are all parts welcome? What about parts that hurt people or do bad things? IFS holds that all parts are welcome within an internal system that chooses to understand and get to know each of the parts. It is only through relationship with our parts that we can welcome them. Relationship builds trust. As trust deepens, our parts will share their experiences with us. We welcome our parts by being with them and validating their experiences as they share who they are. We say there are no bad parts. But parts do engage poor strategies to get their needs met.	Все части приветствуются? А как насчет частей, которые причиняют вред людям или делают плохие вещи? IFS считает, что все части приветствуются внутри внутренней системы, которая решает понять и изучить каждую из частей. Только через отношения со своими частями мы можем приветствовать их. Отношения создают доверие. По мере углубления доверия наши части будут делиться с нами своим опытом. Мы приветствуем наши части, находясь с ними и подтверждая их опыт, когда они делятся тем, кем они являются. Мы говорим, что нет плохих деталей. Но части действительно используют плохие стратегии для удовлетворения своих потребностей.	Are all parts welcome? What about parts that hurt people or do bad things? IFS holds that all parts are welcome within an internal system that chooses to understand and get to know each of the parts. It is only through relationship with our parts that we can welcome them. Relationship builds trust. As trust deepens, our parts will share their experiences with us. We welcome our parts by being with them and validating their experiences as they share who they are. We say there are no bad parts. But parts do engage poor strategies to get their needs met.
Assumption 4: We all have a Self	Assumption 4: We all have a Self	Предположение 4: У каждого из нас есть «Я»	Assumption 4: We all have a Self
Self is the core or essence of a person. Self is also called the Soul, the Seat of Consciousness, and Prana. Like parts, we all have a Self. It is the intuitive, wise, healing energy we all possess.	Self is the core or essence of a person. Self is also called the Soul, the Seat of Consciousness, and Prana. Like parts, we all have a Self. It is the intuitive, wise, healing energy we all possess.	Я – это ядро ​​или сущность человека. «Я» также называют Душой, Местом Сознания и Праной. Как и части, у всех нас есть «Я». Это интуитивная, мудрая, целительная энергия, которой мы все обладаем.	Self is the core or essence of a person. Self is also called the Soul, the Seat of Consciousness, and Prana. Like parts, we all have a Self. It is the intuitive, wise, healing energy we all possess.
Assumption 5: Parts carry burdens	Assumption 5: Parts carry burdens	Допущение 5: Детали несут нагрузку	Assumption 5: Parts carry burdens
Burdens are emotions, beliefs, and thoughts that affect how parts view themselves, others, and the world, and impact their interactions. Parts are not their burdens; they carry burdens. The extreme roles parts take on are their burdens. Instead of referring to a part as “The Rager,” which makes the part the burden, we want to say, a part that has, expresses, feels, or carries rage. This allows for separation between the part and its emotions or actions.	Burdens are emotions, beliefs, and thoughts that affect how parts view themselves, others, and the world, and impact their interactions. Parts are not their burdens; they carry burdens. The extreme roles parts take on are their burdens. Instead of referring to a part as “The Rager,” which makes the part the burden, we want to say, a part that has, expresses, feels, or carries rage. This allows for separation between the part and its emotions or actions.	Бремя — это эмоции, убеждения и мысли, которые влияют на то, как части воспринимают себя, других и мир, а также влияют на их взаимодействие. Части не являются их бременем; они несут бремя. Крайние роли, которые берут на себя части, — это их бремя. Вместо того, чтобы называть часть «Яростной», что делает ее бременем, мы хотим сказать, что это часть, которая испытывает, выражает, чувствует или несет ярость. Это позволяет разделить часть и ее эмоции или действия.	Burdens are emotions, beliefs, and thoughts that affect how parts view themselves, others, and the world, and impact their interactions. Parts are not their burdens; they carry burdens. The extreme roles parts take on are their burdens. Instead of referring to a part as “The Rager,” which makes the part the burden, we want to say, a part that has, expresses, feels, or carries rage. This allows for separation between the part and its emotions or actions.
Assumption 6: Parts are well-intentioned	Assumption 6: Parts are well-intentioned	Предположение 6: Части созданы из лучших побуждений	Assumption 6: Parts are well-intentioned
We must always remember that regardless of how parts behave, they are always well-intentioned. Our job is to connect with our parts and get to know them to understand their intentions. Even parts who cause problems and difficulties in our lives have the best intentions. Parts do what they do because they are not aware of their impact or alternatives. They often believe that if they stop, something bad will happen to us or someone important to us.	We must always remember that regardless of how parts behave, they are always well-intentioned. Our job is to connect with our parts and get to know them to understand their intentions. Even parts who cause problems and difficulties in our lives have the best intentions. Parts do what they do because they are not aware of their impact or alternatives. They often believe that if they stop, something bad will happen to us or someone important to us.	Мы всегда должны помнить, что независимо от того, как ведут себя части, они всегда действуют из лучших побуждений. Наша задача — установить связь с нашими частями и узнать их, чтобы понять их намерения. Даже те части, которые вызывают проблемы и трудности в нашей жизни, имеют самые благие намерения. Части делают то, что делают, потому что не осознают своего влияния или альтернатив. Они часто верят, что если остановятся, с нами или с кем-то важным для нас произойдет что-то плохое.	We must always remember that regardless of how parts behave, they are always well-intentioned. Our job is to connect with our parts and get to know them to understand their intentions. Even parts who cause problems and difficulties in our lives have the best intentions. Parts do what they do because they are not aware of their impact or alternatives. They often believe that if they stop, something bad will happen to us or someone important to us.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK	HOW TO USE THIS BOOK	КАК ПОЛЬЗОВАТЬСЯ ЭТОЙ КНИГОЙ	HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
I wrote Listening When Parts Speak to support you on your healing journey. Although I’m a psychotherapist, I realize not everyone chooses therapy as their path to healing. I also realize therapy still carries stigma for some people, including in the Black community and among other people of color. For others, it may not be an option for other reasons. But everyone deserves to heal, and my mission is to use my expertise as a therapist to offer the phenomenal gift of access to the healing resource within you. So, whether you’re engaging this work for self-help, as a client in therapy, as a mental health therapist, or as a practitioner/coach, it has transformational potential. Therapists and practitioners can use the book in working with their clients and as part of their personal work. Regardless of how the information, meditations, and/or exercises are used, they are not a substitute for therapeutic services. As you begin working with your system and parts, if you get stuck, you find the work too overwhelming or highly triggering, or your symptoms worsen, these are indicators that you would benefit from working with an IFS therapist or practitioner. Please refer to the resources in Chapter 14 to locate an IFS professional.	I wrote Listening When Parts Speak to support you on your healing journey. Although I’m a psychotherapist, I realize not everyone chooses therapy as their path to healing. I also realize therapy still carries stigma for some people, including in the Black community and among other people of color. For others, it may not be an option for other reasons. But everyone deserves to heal, and my mission is to use my expertise as a therapist to offer the phenomenal gift of access to the healing resource within you. So, whether you’re engaging this work for self-help, as a client in therapy, as a mental health therapist, or as a practitioner/coach, it has transformational potential. Therapists and practitioners can use the book in working with their clients and as part of their personal work. Regardless of how the information, meditations, and/or exercises are used, they are not a substitute for therapeutic services. As you begin working with your system and parts, if you get stuck, you find the work too overwhelming or highly triggering, or your symptoms worsen, these are indicators that you would benefit from working with an IFS therapist or practitioner. Please refer to the resources in Chapter 14 to locate an IFS professional.	Я написал «Слушать, когда говорят части», чтобы поддержать вас на пути к исцелению. Хотя я психотерапевт, я понимаю, что не все выбирают терапию как путь к исцелению. Я также понимаю, что терапия по-прежнему несет в себе стигму для некоторых людей, в том числе среди чернокожих и среди других цветных людей. Для других это может быть не вариант по другим причинам. Но каждый заслуживает исцеления, и моя миссия — использовать свой опыт терапевта, чтобы предложить феноменальный дар доступа к исцеляющему ресурсу внутри вас. Итак, независимо от того, занимаетесь ли вы этой работой для самопомощи, как клиент в терапии, как психотерапевт или как практик/тренер, она имеет преобразующий потенциал. Терапевты и практикующие врачи могут использовать книгу в работе со своими клиентами и в рамках своей личной работы. Независимо от того, как используются информация, медитации и/или упражнения, они не заменяют терапевтические услуги. Когда вы начнете работать со своей системой и ее частями, если вы застрянете, обнаружите, что работа слишком утомительна или сильно провоцирует, или ваши симптомы ухудшаются, это показатели того, что вам будет полезно работать с терапевтом или практикующим специалистом IFS. Чтобы найти специалиста по IFS, обратитесь к ресурсам в главе 14.	I wrote Listening When Parts Speak to support you on your healing journey. Although I’m a psychotherapist, I realize not everyone chooses therapy as their path to healing. I also realize therapy still carries stigma for some people, including in the Black community and among other people of color. For others, it may not be an option for other reasons. But everyone deserves to heal, and my mission is to use my expertise as a therapist to offer the phenomenal gift of access to the healing resource within you. So, whether you’re engaging this work for self-help, as a client in therapy, as a mental health therapist, or as a practitioner/coach, it has transformational potential. Therapists and practitioners can use the book in working with their clients and as part of their personal work. Regardless of how the information, meditations, and/or exercises are used, they are not a substitute for therapeutic services. As you begin working with your system and parts, if you get stuck, you find the work too overwhelming or highly triggering, or your symptoms worsen, these are indicators that you would benefit from working with an IFS therapist or practitioner. Please refer to the resources in Chapter 14 to locate an IFS professional.
Each chapter begins with a vignette of my experience working with my own parts. Then I introduce you to key IFS concepts, and in most of the chapters, I include a vignette of working with a client’s system that highlights the concepts in the chapter. Most of the client vignettes are a composite of multiple client cases blended and presented as a single case. They include memories of childhood sexual abuse, domestic violence and witnessing violence, suicidal ideation and attempts of suicide, loss of a child, racism and discrimination, vomiting, and sexual trafficking.	Each chapter begins with a vignette of my experience working with my own parts. Then I introduce you to key IFS concepts, and in most of the chapters, I include a vignette of working with a client’s system that highlights the concepts in the chapter. Most of the client vignettes are a composite of multiple client cases blended and presented as a single case. They include memories of childhood sexual abuse, domestic violence and witnessing violence, suicidal ideation and attempts of suicide, loss of a child, racism and discrimination, vomiting, and sexual trafficking.	Каждая глава начинается с краткого описания моего опыта работы с собственными партиями. Затем я познакомлю вас с ключевыми концепциями IFS и в большинстве глав я включаю эпизод работы с системой клиента, в котором освещаются концепции, изложенные в главе. Большинство историй о клиентах представляют собой совокупность нескольких клиентских случаев, объединенных и представленных как один случай. Они включают в себя воспоминания о сексуальном насилии в детстве, домашнем насилии и фактах свидетелей насилия, суицидальных мыслях и попытках самоубийства, потере ребенка, расизме и дискриминации, рвоте и сексуальной торговле.	Each chapter begins with a vignette of my experience working with my own parts. Then I introduce you to key IFS concepts, and in most of the chapters, I include a vignette of working with a client’s system that highlights the concepts in the chapter. Most of the client vignettes are a composite of multiple client cases blended and presented as a single case. They include memories of childhood sexual abuse, domestic violence and witnessing violence, suicidal ideation and attempts of suicide, loss of a child, racism and discrimination, vomiting, and sexual trafficking.
At the end of the chapter you’ll find a meditation, followed by exercises to anchor the learning and experience. The concepts and meditations build on one another. If you are new to IFS, I suggest reading the book in order. If you have experience with IFS, you may choose the chapter that best meets your needs at a particular time or for a specific situation. Be sure to have a journal or a notebook at hand to track your experiences and growth as you work with your parts.	At the end of the chapter you’ll find a meditation, followed by exercises to anchor the learning and experience. The concepts and meditations build on one another. If you are new to IFS, I suggest reading the book in order. If you have experience with IFS, you may choose the chapter that best meets your needs at a particular time or for a specific situation. Be sure to have a journal or a notebook at hand to track your experiences and growth as you work with your parts.	В конце главы вы найдете медитацию, за которой следуют упражнения, которые закрепят полученные знания и опыт. Концепции и медитации дополняют друг друга. Если вы новичок в IFS, предлагаю прочитать книгу по порядку. Если у вас есть опыт работы с IFS, вы можете выбрать главу, которая лучше всего соответствует вашим потребностям в определенное время или для конкретной ситуации. Обязательно имейте под рукой дневник или блокнот, чтобы отслеживать свой опыт и рост во время работы с деталями.	At the end of the chapter you’ll find a meditation, followed by exercises to anchor the learning and experience. The concepts and meditations build on one another. If you are new to IFS, I suggest reading the book in order. If you have experience with IFS, you may choose the chapter that best meets your needs at a particular time or for a specific situation. Be sure to have a journal or a notebook at hand to track your experiences and growth as you work with your parts.
I wrote this book with the intention that you will meet, get to know, and heal your parts. With that in mind, know that your parts will get activated as you read. This may happen because some parts will resonate with my parts or the parts of my clients while other parts will disagree or be skeptical. This book may activate parts around your unhealed trauma, family and relationship struggles, and myriad other yet-to-be-addressed concerns. My suggestion is to slow down when you notice a strong response to what you’re reading, breathe, and pay attention to what is going on in your body. What sensations do you notice? What memories are coming up? What are you thinking? Then journal what comes up for you. There may be times when you have to put the book down to address what’s coming up for you, and that’s okay. The relationship between you, your parts, and the material of this book is interactive. The more you listen when your parts speak and attend to what they bring to your awareness, the more you’re going to gain from the reading of this book.	I wrote this book with the intention that you will meet, get to know, and heal your parts. With that in mind, know that your parts will get activated as you read. This may happen because some parts will resonate with my parts or the parts of my clients while other parts will disagree or be skeptical. This book may activate parts around your unhealed trauma, family and relationship struggles, and myriad other yet-to-be-addressed concerns. My suggestion is to slow down when you notice a strong response to what you’re reading, breathe, and pay attention to what is going on in your body. What sensations do you notice? What memories are coming up? What are you thinking? Then journal what comes up for you. There may be times when you have to put the book down to address what’s coming up for you, and that’s okay. The relationship between you, your parts, and the material of this book is interactive. The more you listen when your parts speak and attend to what they bring to your awareness, the more you’re going to gain from the reading of this book.	Я написал эту книгу с намерением, чтобы вы встретились, узнали и исцелили свои части тела. Имея это в виду, знайте, что ваши части будут активироваться во время чтения. Это может произойти потому, что некоторые части будут резонировать с моими частями или частями моих клиентов, в то время как другие части будут несогласны или настроены скептически. Эта книга может активировать части вашей незаживающей травмы, проблем в семье и отношениях, а также множество других проблем, которые еще предстоит решить. Я предлагаю замедлиться, когда вы заметите сильную реакцию на то, что вы читаете, дышите и обращаете внимание на то, что происходит в вашем теле. Какие ощущения вы замечаете? Какие воспоминания возникают? О чем ты думаешь? Затем записывайте то, что вам приходит в голову. Могут быть моменты, когда вам придется отложить книгу, чтобы обсудить то, что вас ждет, и это нормально. Отношения между вами, вашими частями и материалом этой книги интерактивны. Чем больше вы слушаете, когда говорят ваши части, и обращаете внимание на то, что они доносят до вашего сознания, тем больше вы получите от чтения этой книги.	I wrote this book with the intention that you will meet, get to know, and heal your parts. With that in mind, know that your parts will get activated as you read. This may happen because some parts will resonate with my parts or the parts of my clients while other parts will disagree or be skeptical. This book may activate parts around your unhealed trauma, family and relationship struggles, and myriad other yet-to-be-addressed concerns. My suggestion is to slow down when you notice a strong response to what you’re reading, breathe, and pay attention to what is going on in your body. What sensations do you notice? What memories are coming up? What are you thinking? Then journal what comes up for you. There may be times when you have to put the book down to address what’s coming up for you, and that’s okay. The relationship between you, your parts, and the material of this book is interactive. The more you listen when your parts speak and attend to what they bring to your awareness, the more you’re going to gain from the reading of this book.
Self-Help	Self-Help	Самопомощь	Self-Help
Therapy and coaching are not required to benefit from this book. It can be used independently as a self-help tool. The teachings, meditations, and exercises help foster trust between the Self and parts, which is essential to the healing process. The IFS concepts, ancestor-inspired meditations, and exercises are to deepen relationship and understanding of your parts, to increase internal and external Self-leadership (meaning Self is in the seat of consciousness), and to connect with the wisdom and guidance of ancestors. Self-leadership involves a shift in your internal system from being reactive and/or passive to being more intuitive. As you come into relationship with your parts, they are encouraged to separate from Self, allowing Self to lead and make decisions that embody the essential qualities of Self: compassion, confidence, clarity, courage, creativity, calm, curiosity, and connectedness. These qualities are often called the eight Cs, and we’ll talk more about these qualities and call them into action throughout the book.	Therapy and coaching are not required to benefit from this book. It can be used independently as a self-help tool. The teachings, meditations, and exercises help foster trust between the Self and parts, which is essential to the healing process. The IFS concepts, ancestor-inspired meditations, and exercises are to deepen relationship and understanding of your parts, to increase internal and external Self-leadership (meaning Self is in the seat of consciousness), and to connect with the wisdom and guidance of ancestors. Self-leadership involves a shift in your internal system from being reactive and/or passive to being more intuitive. As you come into relationship with your parts, they are encouraged to separate from Self, allowing Self to lead and make decisions that embody the essential qualities of Self: compassion, confidence, clarity, courage, creativity, calm, curiosity, and connectedness. These qualities are often called the eight Cs, and we’ll talk more about these qualities and call them into action throughout the book.	Чтобы получить пользу от этой книги, не требуются терапия и коучинг. Его можно использовать самостоятельно как инструмент самопомощи. Учения, медитации и упражнения помогают укрепить доверие между Высшим Я и частями, что важно для процесса исцеления. Концепции IFS, медитации и упражнения, вдохновленные предками, призваны углубить взаимоотношения и понимание ваших частей, повысить внутреннее и внешнее Самолидерство (это означает, что «Я» находится в центре сознания), а также соединиться с мудростью и руководством предков. . Самолидерство предполагает переход вашей внутренней системы от реактивной и/или пассивной к более интуитивной. Когда вы вступаете в отношения со своими частями, им предлагается отделиться от «Я», позволяя «Я» вести и принимать решения, которые воплощают основные качества «Я»: сострадание, уверенность, ясность, смелость, творчество, спокойствие, любопытство и связанность. Эти качества часто называют восемью «С», и на протяжении всей книги мы будем говорить об этих качествах и призывать их к действию.	Therapy and coaching are not required to benefit from this book. It can be used independently as a self-help tool. The teachings, meditations, and exercises help foster trust between the Self and parts, which is essential to the healing process. The IFS concepts, ancestor-inspired meditations, and exercises are to deepen relationship and understanding of your parts, to increase internal and external Self-leadership (meaning Self is in the seat of consciousness), and to connect with the wisdom and guidance of ancestors. Self-leadership involves a shift in your internal system from being reactive and/or passive to being more intuitive. As you come into relationship with your parts, they are encouraged to separate from Self, allowing Self to lead and make decisions that embody the essential qualities of Self: compassion, confidence, clarity, courage, creativity, calm, curiosity, and connectedness. These qualities are often called the eight Cs, and we’ll talk more about these qualities and call them into action throughout the book.
The meditations lead you through scenes with the guidance of ancestors to connect with your parts. You are encouraged to get to know parts of yourself, to create space between your parts and Self, and to develop a trusting Self-to-part relationship. The meditation work is supported and expanded with exercises to broaden the experience by further helping parts feel seen, heard, and appreciated.	The meditations lead you through scenes with the guidance of ancestors to connect with your parts. You are encouraged to get to know parts of yourself, to create space between your parts and Self, and to develop a trusting Self-to-part relationship. The meditation work is supported and expanded with exercises to broaden the experience by further helping parts feel seen, heard, and appreciated.	Медитации проведут вас через сцены под руководством предков, чтобы соединиться с вашими частями тела. Вам предлагается узнать части себя, создать пространство между своими частями и «Я» и развить доверительные отношения между «Я» и «Я». Медитативную работу поддерживают и расширяют упражнениями, которые расширяют опыт, помогая частям почувствовать себя увиденными, услышанными и оцененными.	The meditations lead you through scenes with the guidance of ancestors to connect with your parts. You are encouraged to get to know parts of yourself, to create space between your parts and Self, and to develop a trusting Self-to-part relationship. The meditation work is supported and expanded with exercises to broaden the experience by further helping parts feel seen, heard, and appreciated.
In Conjunction with Therapy and Coaching	In Conjunction with Therapy and Coaching	В сочетании с терапией и коучингом	In Conjunction with Therapy and Coaching
As a consultant to therapists and coaches, I have found that most of them are constantly seeking ways to deepen changes, learning, and healing outside of their sessions. The real work of therapy and coaching takes place in the client’s life, so offering homework enables the client to practice in the world what is learned. Most therapists and practitioners see their clients once a week for 60 minutes, and although deep work occurs in these sessions, clients benefit by remaining connected to the work and their parts between sessions. This book offers meditations, exercises, and homework assignments to complete in the in-between time to deepen session work. The book can also be used during a session for guided meditation, working through exercises together in support of the work and to educate clients about the model.	As a consultant to therapists and coaches, I have found that most of them are constantly seeking ways to deepen changes, learning, and healing outside of their sessions. The real work of therapy and coaching takes place in the client’s life, so offering homework enables the client to practice in the world what is learned. Most therapists and practitioners see their clients once a week for 60 minutes, and although deep work occurs in these sessions, clients benefit by remaining connected to the work and their parts between sessions. This book offers meditations, exercises, and homework assignments to complete in the in-between time to deepen session work. The book can also be used during a session for guided meditation, working through exercises together in support of the work and to educate clients about the model.	Как консультант терапевтов и тренеров, я обнаружил, что большинство из них постоянно ищут способы углубить изменения, обучение и исцеление вне своих сессий. Настоящая работа терапии и коучинга происходит в жизни клиента, поэтому предложение домашнего задания позволяет клиенту практиковать в мире то, чему он научился. Большинство терапевтов и практиков видят своих клиентов раз в неделю в течение 60 минут, и хотя на этих сеансах происходит глубокая работа, клиенты получают пользу, оставаясь на связи с работой и ее частями между сеансами. Эта книга предлагает медитации, упражнения и домашние задания, которые нужно выполнять в промежутках между сеансами, чтобы углубить сессионную работу. Книгу также можно использовать во время сеанса управляемой медитации, совместной работы над упражнениями в поддержку работы и для ознакомления клиентов с моделью.	As a consultant to therapists and coaches, I have found that most of them are constantly seeking ways to deepen changes, learning, and healing outside of their sessions. The real work of therapy and coaching takes place in the client’s life, so offering homework enables the client to practice in the world what is learned. Most therapists and practitioners see their clients once a week for 60 minutes, and although deep work occurs in these sessions, clients benefit by remaining connected to the work and their parts between sessions. This book offers meditations, exercises, and homework assignments to complete in the in-between time to deepen session work. The book can also be used during a session for guided meditation, working through exercises together in support of the work and to educate clients about the model.
For Therapists and Practitioners	For Therapists and Practitioners	Для терапевтов и практикующих врачей	For Therapists and Practitioners
One of the true gifts I’ve received as an IFS therapist is the healing of doing my own work. Being a healed healer (or at least working toward healing) is a gift we give not only to ourselves, but to our clients. The greater access we have to Self-energy, the more effective we are in our work with clients. This model asserts that Self is the healing agent of the system, ours, and our clients. If we truly believe and subscribe to this assumption, then getting to know our parts and offering healing to them makes sense. This book can help therapists and practitioners do their own personal work to become more healed healers.	One of the true gifts I’ve received as an IFS therapist is the healing of doing my own work. Being a healed healer (or at least working toward healing) is a gift we give not only to ourselves, but to our clients. The greater access we have to Self-energy, the more effective we are in our work with clients. This model asserts that Self is the healing agent of the system, ours, and our clients. If we truly believe and subscribe to this assumption, then getting to know our parts and offering healing to them makes sense. This book can help therapists and practitioners do their own personal work to become more healed healers.	Один из настоящих подарков, которые я получил как терапевт IFS, — это исцеление от выполнения собственной работы. Быть исцеленным целителем (или, по крайней мере, стремиться к исцелению) — это дар, который мы дарим не только себе, но и нашим клиентам. Чем больше у нас доступа к собственной энергии, тем эффективнее мы работаем с клиентами. Эта модель утверждает, что Самость является исцеляющим агентом системы, нашей и наших клиентов. Если мы действительно верим и подписываемся под этим предположением, тогда имеет смысл узнать наши части тела и предложить им исцеление. Эта книга может помочь терапевтам и практикующим врачам выполнять свою личную работу, чтобы стать более исцеляющимися целителями.	One of the true gifts I’ve received as an IFS therapist is the healing of doing my own work. Being a healed healer (or at least working toward healing) is a gift we give not only to ourselves, but to our clients. The greater access we have to Self-energy, the more effective we are in our work with clients. This model asserts that Self is the healing agent of the system, ours, and our clients. If we truly believe and subscribe to this assumption, then getting to know our parts and offering healing to them makes sense. This book can help therapists and practitioners do their own personal work to become more healed healers.
I invite you into the world of parts within this book and within yourself. As you read through each chapter, my hope for you is that you develop an intimate relationship with parts of yourself, either for the first time or in a deeper way. By the time you reach the end of this book, I wish you a new level of healing, wholeness, and appreciation for your parts, and ultimately for your Self.	I invite you into the world of parts within this book and within yourself. As you read through each chapter, my hope for you is that you develop an intimate relationship with parts of yourself, either for the first time or in a deeper way. By the time you reach the end of this book, I wish you a new level of healing, wholeness, and appreciation for your parts, and ultimately for your Self.	Я приглашаю вас в мир частей этой книги и внутри вас самих. Я надеюсь, что, читая каждую главу, вы разовьете близкие отношения с частями себя либо впервые, либо на более глубокой основе. К тому времени, как вы дойдете до конца этой книги, я желаю вам нового уровня исцеления, целостности и понимания своих частей и, в конечном итоге, своего Я.	I invite you into the world of parts within this book and within yourself. As you read through each chapter, my hope for you is that you develop an intimate relationship with parts of yourself, either for the first time or in a deeper way. By the time you reach the end of this book, I wish you a new level of healing, wholeness, and appreciation for your parts, and ultimately for your Self.
CHAPTER 2	CHAPTER 2	ГЛАВА 2	CHAPTER 2
Connecting Inside	Connecting Inside	Подключение внутри	Connecting Inside
Meeting Your Parts	Meeting Your Parts	Встреча ваших частей	Meeting Your Parts
Carefree is the name she had before she became a people pleaser. When Carefree had not a care in the world, she had an easygoing manner that drew children and adults alike into her orbit, and she was only a child herself. She heard adults use words like full of life, creative, talkative, engaging, a joy to be around when speaking of her. The words sounded nice to her, and she also knew words didn’t and couldn’t fully capture her essence. She had an awareness that she was more than the words people used to describe her. She felt light and at home in her body. The world she lived in was exciting, limitless, and full of possibilities. She awoke each day free of worry and fear. She possessed a knowing that she was the creator of her experience, and the options were infinite.	Carefree is the name she had before she became a people pleaser. When Carefree had not a care in the world, she had an easygoing manner that drew children and adults alike into her orbit, and she was only a child herself. She heard adults use words like full of life, creative, talkative, engaging, a joy to be around when speaking of her. The words sounded nice to her, and she also knew words didn’t and couldn’t fully capture her essence. She had an awareness that she was more than the words people used to describe her. She felt light and at home in her body. The world she lived in was exciting, limitless, and full of possibilities. She awoke each day free of worry and fear. She possessed a knowing that she was the creator of her experience, and the options were infinite.	Беззаботная — это имя, которое она носила до того, как стала нравиться людям. Когда Беззаботная не заботилась о мире, у нее были спокойные манеры, которые привлекали в свою орбиту как детей, так и взрослых, а она сама была всего лишь ребенком. Она слышала, как взрослые использовали такие слова, как «полная жизни», «творческая», «разговорчивая», «привлекательная», «радость быть рядом», когда говорили о ней. Слова звучали для нее приятно, но она также знала, что слова не отражали и не могли полностью передать ее суть. Она осознавала, что она нечто большее, чем те слова, которыми люди ее описывали. Она чувствовала себя легко и комфортно в своем теле. Мир, в котором она жила, был захватывающим, безграничным и полным возможностей. Каждый день она просыпалась без беспокойства и страха. Она знала, что является творцом своего опыта, и ее возможности были безграничны.	Carefree is the name she had before she became a people pleaser. When Carefree had not a care in the world, she had an easygoing manner that drew children and adults alike into her orbit, and she was only a child herself. She heard adults use words like full of life, creative, talkative, engaging, a joy to be around when speaking of her. The words sounded nice to her, and she also knew words didn’t and couldn’t fully capture her essence. She had an awareness that she was more than the words people used to describe her. She felt light and at home in her body. The world she lived in was exciting, limitless, and full of possibilities. She awoke each day free of worry and fear. She possessed a knowing that she was the creator of her experience, and the options were infinite.
The changes in Carefree didn’t happen at once. Life at home, school, and in her neighborhood chipped away at her. She came to learn that being herself was less valuable than being who people wanted her to be. At first, she made little shifts to accommodate the expectations of others. With each change, no matter how insignificant it seemed at the time, Carefree became less of herself. Worry and fear crept into her existence. The light and comfortable feeling in her body became heavy and foreign. Instead of experiencing life as limitless and full of possibilities, it became finite with right and wrong choices and outcomes. Safety and certainty were no longer found within her but were dependent on her meeting the needs and expectations of others. Her easygoing, fun-loving energy was met with disapproving frowns and statements like “You play too much” or “You need to take this seriously.” Once Carefree no longer heard herself described as full of life and a joy to be around, but as dependable, responsible, and the one you can count on, the transformation was complete. Ultimately, Carefree covered who she was to gain the approval of others and to be liked.	The changes in Carefree didn’t happen at once. Life at home, school, and in her neighborhood chipped away at her. She came to learn that being herself was less valuable than being who people wanted her to be. At first, she made little shifts to accommodate the expectations of others. With each change, no matter how insignificant it seemed at the time, Carefree became less of herself. Worry and fear crept into her existence. The light and comfortable feeling in her body became heavy and foreign. Instead of experiencing life as limitless and full of possibilities, it became finite with right and wrong choices and outcomes. Safety and certainty were no longer found within her but were dependent on her meeting the needs and expectations of others. Her easygoing, fun-loving energy was met with disapproving frowns and statements like “You play too much” or “You need to take this seriously.” Once Carefree no longer heard herself described as full of life and a joy to be around, but as dependable, responsible, and the one you can count on, the transformation was complete. Ultimately, Carefree covered who she was to gain the approval of others and to be liked.	Изменения в Carefree произошли не сразу. Жизнь дома, в школе и по соседству ее изматывала. Она поняла, что быть самой собой менее ценно, чем быть такой, какой ее хотят видеть люди. Поначалу она вносила небольшие изменения, чтобы оправдать ожидания других. С каждым изменением, каким бы незначительным оно ни казалось в то время, Беззаботная становилась все меньше самой себя. В ее существование вкрались беспокойство и страх. Ощущение легкости и комфорта в ее теле стало тяжелым и чуждым. Вместо того, чтобы воспринимать жизнь как безграничную и полную возможностей, она стала ограниченной с правильными и неправильными выборами и результатами. Безопасность и уверенность больше не находились внутри нее, а зависели от того, насколько она удовлетворяла потребности и ожидания других. Ее спокойная, веселая энергия встречалась неодобрительными хмурыми взглядами и заявлениями типа «Ты слишком много играешь» или «Тебе нужно отнестись к этому серьезно». Как только Беззаботная больше не слышала, чтобы ее описывали как полную жизни и радость быть рядом, а как надежную, ответственную и ту, на которую можно положиться, трансформация была полной. В конце концов, Беззаботная рассказала, кем она должна была заслужить одобрение других и понравиться.	The changes in Carefree didn’t happen at once. Life at home, school, and in her neighborhood chipped away at her. She came to learn that being herself was less valuable than being who people wanted her to be. At first, she made little shifts to accommodate the expectations of others. With each change, no matter how insignificant it seemed at the time, Carefree became less of herself. Worry and fear crept into her existence. The light and comfortable feeling in her body became heavy and foreign. Instead of experiencing life as limitless and full of possibilities, it became finite with right and wrong choices and outcomes. Safety and certainty were no longer found within her but were dependent on her meeting the needs and expectations of others. Her easygoing, fun-loving energy was met with disapproving frowns and statements like “You play too much” or “You need to take this seriously.” Once Carefree no longer heard herself described as full of life and a joy to be around, but as dependable, responsible, and the one you can count on, the transformation was complete. Ultimately, Carefree covered who she was to gain the approval of others and to be liked.
Carefree is one of my parts, and I have distinct memories of who she was and how she moved through the world before she became burdened by the expectations of others. Her innate qualities were not nurtured and viewed as valuable. Instead, she got the message that she needed to change, which made her feel not good enough and misunderstood. She started to change and take on qualities that pleased those around her. The more people liked and approved of her, the further removed she was from her original nature.	Carefree is one of my parts, and I have distinct memories of who she was and how she moved through the world before she became burdened by the expectations of others. Her innate qualities were not nurtured and viewed as valuable. Instead, she got the message that she needed to change, which made her feel not good enough and misunderstood. She started to change and take on qualities that pleased those around her. The more people liked and approved of her, the further removed she was from her original nature.	Беззаботность — одна из моих частей, и у меня есть отчетливые воспоминания о том, кем она была и как она двигалась по миру до того, как стала обременена ожиданиями других. Ее врожденные качества не лелеялись и не рассматривались как ценные. Вместо этого она получила сообщение о том, что ей нужно измениться, из-за чего она почувствовала себя недостаточно хорошей и непонятой. Она начала меняться и приобретать качества, которые нравились окружающим. Чем больше людей любили и одобряли ее, тем дальше она удалялась от своей первоначальной природы.	Carefree is one of my parts, and I have distinct memories of who she was and how she moved through the world before she became burdened by the expectations of others. Her innate qualities were not nurtured and viewed as valuable. Instead, she got the message that she needed to change, which made her feel not good enough and misunderstood. She started to change and take on qualities that pleased those around her. The more people liked and approved of her, the further removed she was from her original nature.
The burden of pleasing others while denying myself is one that I still struggle with. Although I people please a lot less, I still have the desire to be liked. When I am being myself, the part that wants people to like me wonders, am I doing enough, am I enough, will people like me if I show them who I really am? When I was a child and received praise for being likable, I didn’t know any other way to be. I wasn’t seeking approval. I was just being me. The freedom to truly be who I am, with no care about being liked or not, is what I seek.	The burden of pleasing others while denying myself is one that I still struggle with. Although I people please a lot less, I still have the desire to be liked. When I am being myself, the part that wants people to like me wonders, am I doing enough, am I enough, will people like me if I show them who I really am? When I was a child and received praise for being likable, I didn’t know any other way to be. I wasn’t seeking approval. I was just being me. The freedom to truly be who I am, with no care about being liked or not, is what I seek.	Бремя угождения другим, отказывая себе, — это то, с чем я до сих пор борюсь. Хотя я людям нравлюсь гораздо меньше, у меня все еще есть желание нравиться. Когда я остаюсь самим собой, та часть, которая хочет, чтобы я нравился людям, задается вопросом: достаточно ли я делаю, достаточно ли я, понравлюсь ли я людям, если я покажу им, кто я на самом деле? Когда я был ребенком и меня хвалили за то, что я симпатичный, я не знал другого способа быть собой. Я не искал одобрения. Я просто был собой. Свобода по-настоящему быть тем, кто я есть, не заботясь о том, нравится мне это или нет, — вот чего я ищу.	The burden of pleasing others while denying myself is one that I still struggle with. Although I people please a lot less, I still have the desire to be liked. When I am being myself, the part that wants people to like me wonders, am I doing enough, am I enough, will people like me if I show them who I really am? When I was a child and received praise for being likable, I didn’t know any other way to be. I wasn’t seeking approval. I was just being me. The freedom to truly be who I am, with no care about being liked or not, is what I seek.
Who is the “I” speaking in the paragraph you just read? Is it me, or is it Carefree? Is the me that is me separate from the me that is Carefree?	Who is the “I” speaking in the paragraph you just read? Is it me, or is it Carefree? Is the me that is me separate from the me that is Carefree?	Кто это «Я», говорящее в только что прочитанном абзаце? Это я или Беззаботный? Отделен ли я, который есть я, от меня, который Беззаботен?	Who is the “I” speaking in the paragraph you just read? Is it me, or is it Carefree? Is the me that is me separate from the me that is Carefree?
That paragraph is from Carefree’s perspective. This is her experience. And we are not separate. She is a part of me. I view my parts and the parts of the people I work with as individual humans with feelings, ideas, beliefs, life experiences. It is important to mention that our parts may or may not appear as we do. For instance, some of our parts share our gender, racial identities, and sexual orientation while other parts do not. You will see later in one of my opening vignettes that I have male-identified parts although I identify as female. Viewing parts as the subpersonalities they are helps me to better relate to my parts and the parts of others. However, when Carefree is in my seat of consciousness, my experience of the world is from her perspective. Carefree is the part of me that still carries some of the people-pleasing burden and desires to return to her unburdened state.	That paragraph is from Carefree’s perspective. This is her experience. And we are not separate. She is a part of me. I view my parts and the parts of the people I work with as individual humans with feelings, ideas, beliefs, life experiences. It is important to mention that our parts may or may not appear as we do. For instance, some of our parts share our gender, racial identities, and sexual orientation while other parts do not. You will see later in one of my opening vignettes that I have male-identified parts although I identify as female. Viewing parts as the subpersonalities they are helps me to better relate to my parts and the parts of others. However, when Carefree is in my seat of consciousness, my experience of the world is from her perspective. Carefree is the part of me that still carries some of the people-pleasing burden and desires to return to her unburdened state.	Этот абзац написан с точки зрения Carefree. Это ее опыт. И мы не разделены. Она часть меня. Я рассматриваю свои части и части людей, с которыми работаю, как отдельных людей с чувствами, идеями, убеждениями и жизненным опытом. Важно отметить, что наши части могут выглядеть, а могут и не выглядеть так, как мы. Например, некоторые наши части разделяют наш пол, расовую идентичность и сексуальную ориентацию, а другие нет. Позже в одном из моих вступительных эпизодов вы увидите, что у меня есть части, отождествляемые с мужчинами, хотя я идентифицирую себя как женщина. Рассмотрение частей как субличностей, которыми они являются, помогает мне лучше относиться к своим частям и частям других. Однако, когда Беззаботная находится в моем сознании, я воспринимаю мир с ее точки зрения. Беззаботность — это та часть меня, которая все еще несет в себе часть бремени, приятного людям, и желает вернуться в свое необремененное состояние.	That paragraph is from Carefree’s perspective. This is her experience. And we are not separate. She is a part of me. I view my parts and the parts of the people I work with as individual humans with feelings, ideas, beliefs, life experiences. It is important to mention that our parts may or may not appear as we do. For instance, some of our parts share our gender, racial identities, and sexual orientation while other parts do not. You will see later in one of my opening vignettes that I have male-identified parts although I identify as female. Viewing parts as the subpersonalities they are helps me to better relate to my parts and the parts of others. However, when Carefree is in my seat of consciousness, my experience of the world is from her perspective. Carefree is the part of me that still carries some of the people-pleasing burden and desires to return to her unburdened state.
IFS CONCEPT 1: PROTECTIVE NATURE OF PARTS	IFS CONCEPT 1: PROTECTIVE NATURE OF PARTS	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: ЗАЩИТА ДЕТАЛЕЙ	IFS CONCEPT 1: PROTECTIVE NATURE OF PARTS
When we are born, our parts are in their natural state. In most cases, they are not burdened. They can express the full nature of who they are: playful, curious, calm, free, loving, to name a few. However, as children, when our needs for attention, affection, acceptance, and nurturance go unmet, are made fun of, or are denied, our natural ways of being become exiled. We learn that it isn’t safe to be fully who we are. We learn that parts of us are unlovable, not good enough, shameful, and should be hidden. Parts take on roles to protect us from feeling these strong feelings of worthlessness. They do this in one of two ways: They keep us from experiencing the strong feelings by controlling everything they can, keeping us too busy, focused on other things, or distracted to feel our unmet needs. Or, when something in our life triggers our feelings of not-good-enough or shame, parts swoop in to douse the severity of these feelings with intense distractions to take the attention off the emotional pain.	When we are born, our parts are in their natural state. In most cases, they are not burdened. They can express the full nature of who they are: playful, curious, calm, free, loving, to name a few. However, as children, when our needs for attention, affection, acceptance, and nurturance go unmet, are made fun of, or are denied, our natural ways of being become exiled. We learn that it isn’t safe to be fully who we are. We learn that parts of us are unlovable, not good enough, shameful, and should be hidden. Parts take on roles to protect us from feeling these strong feelings of worthlessness. They do this in one of two ways: They keep us from experiencing the strong feelings by controlling everything they can, keeping us too busy, focused on other things, or distracted to feel our unmet needs. Or, when something in our life triggers our feelings of not-good-enough or shame, parts swoop in to douse the severity of these feelings with intense distractions to take the attention off the emotional pain.	Когда мы рождаемся, наши части тела находятся в своем естественном состоянии. В большинстве случаев они не обременены. Они могут полностью выразить свою природу: игривые, любопытные, спокойные, свободные, любящие и это лишь некоторые из них. Однако в детстве, когда наши потребности во внимании, привязанности, принятии и заботе остаются неудовлетворенными, нас высмеивают или отрицают, наши естественные способы существования становятся изгнанниками. Мы узнаем, что небезопасно быть полностью теми, кто мы есть. Мы узнаем, что некоторые части нас непривлекательны, недостаточно хороши, постыдны и должны быть скрыты. Части берут на себя роль защиты нас от ощущения сильной никчемности. Они делают это одним из двух способов: они удерживают нас от переживания сильных чувств, контролируя все, что могут, заставляя нас быть слишком занятыми, сосредоточенными на других вещах или отвлекаться на удовлетворение наших неудовлетворенных потребностей. Или, когда что-то в нашей жизни вызывает у нас чувство недостаточности или стыда, части тела набрасываются на то, чтобы заглушить остроту этих чувств интенсивными отвлекающими факторами, чтобы отвлечь внимание от эмоциональной боли.	When we are born, our parts are in their natural state. In most cases, they are not burdened. They can express the full nature of who they are: playful, curious, calm, free, loving, to name a few. However, as children, when our needs for attention, affection, acceptance, and nurturance go unmet, are made fun of, or are denied, our natural ways of being become exiled. We learn that it isn’t safe to be fully who we are. We learn that parts of us are unlovable, not good enough, shameful, and should be hidden. Parts take on roles to protect us from feeling these strong feelings of worthlessness. They do this in one of two ways: They keep us from experiencing the strong feelings by controlling everything they can, keeping us too busy, focused on other things, or distracted to feel our unmet needs. Or, when something in our life triggers our feelings of not-good-enough or shame, parts swoop in to douse the severity of these feelings with intense distractions to take the attention off the emotional pain.
We call both these types of parts “protectors.” Some protectors protect in a proactive way to keep us feeling secure and from feeling pain and vulnerability. These are called managers because their role is to manage our lives so as to protect us from pain. These parts make a vow to work relentlessly so we never experience the hurt we felt before they took on the job of protecting us. Carefree exiled her innate nature when she believed it was no longer valued. She searched around her to find what was of value and discovered that those closest to Carefree—her parents, teachers, and relatives—liked her most when she fit their ideal of her. By pleasing others, Carefree did not have to feel the pain of not being good enough. Her true self felt not enough to receive the love and attention from those most important to her. To ensure she didn’t have to feel that pain, she became what others needed and expected, and in return she received love and approval. Carefree decided that if she couldn’t be accepted and loved for who she was, she would contort herself into someone others couldn’t help but love, accept, and approve of.	We call both these types of parts “protectors.” Some protectors protect in a proactive way to keep us feeling secure and from feeling pain and vulnerability. These are called managers because their role is to manage our lives so as to protect us from pain. These parts make a vow to work relentlessly so we never experience the hurt we felt before they took on the job of protecting us. Carefree exiled her innate nature when she believed it was no longer valued. She searched around her to find what was of value and discovered that those closest to Carefree—her parents, teachers, and relatives—liked her most when she fit their ideal of her. By pleasing others, Carefree did not have to feel the pain of not being good enough. Her true self felt not enough to receive the love and attention from those most important to her. To ensure she didn’t have to feel that pain, she became what others needed and expected, and in return she received love and approval. Carefree decided that if she couldn’t be accepted and loved for who she was, she would contort herself into someone others couldn’t help but love, accept, and approve of.	Мы называем оба этих типа частей «защитниками». Некоторые защитники активно защищают нас, чтобы мы чувствовали себя в безопасности и не чувствовали боли и уязвимости. Их называют менеджерами, потому что их роль — управлять нашей жизнью так, чтобы защитить нас от боли. Эти части дают клятву работать неустанно, чтобы мы никогда не испытывали той боли, которую чувствовали до того, как они взяли на себя работу по защите нас. Беззаботная изгнала свою врожденную натуру, когда поверила, что ее больше не ценят. Она искала вокруг себя, чтобы найти то, что имело ценность, и обнаружила, что самые близкие к Беззаботной — ее родители, учителя и родственники — любили ее больше всего, когда она соответствовала их идеалам. Угождая другим, Беззаботному не приходилось чувствовать боль от того, что он недостаточно хорош. Ее истинное «Я» чувствовало себя недостаточным, чтобы получить любовь и внимание от тех, кто был для нее самым важным. Чтобы гарантировать, что ей не придется чувствовать эту боль, она стала тем, в чем нуждались и чего ожидали другие, и взамен получила любовь и одобрение. Беззаботная решила, что, если ее нельзя будет принять и полюбить такой, какая она есть, она превратится в кого-то, кого другие не смогут не любить, не принимать и не одобрять.	We call both these types of parts “protectors.” Some protectors protect in a proactive way to keep us feeling secure and from feeling pain and vulnerability. These are called managers because their role is to manage our lives so as to protect us from pain. These parts make a vow to work relentlessly so we never experience the hurt we felt before they took on the job of protecting us. Carefree exiled her innate nature when she believed it was no longer valued. She searched around her to find what was of value and discovered that those closest to Carefree—her parents, teachers, and relatives—liked her most when she fit their ideal of her. By pleasing others, Carefree did not have to feel the pain of not being good enough. Her true self felt not enough to receive the love and attention from those most important to her. To ensure she didn’t have to feel that pain, she became what others needed and expected, and in return she received love and approval. Carefree decided that if she couldn’t be accepted and loved for who she was, she would contort herself into someone others couldn’t help but love, accept, and approve of.
Here are a few examples of how managers operate. Parts may have learned to protect by being high-achieving, depressed, or perfect. The high-achieving part may believe that the only way to have value is to out-achieve everyone else, and if the person receives praise for the strategies of this part, the part’s beliefs and behaviors are rewarded. A part that is depressed may remain in a state of hopelessness to protect the system from feeling something worse, like shame. Another way managers may protect us from feeling inadequate is by pursuing perfection. The perfectionistic part may believe that if it does everything perfectly, we will always feel good enough and we won’t have to experience the pain connected to feelings of worthlessness. The parts in these examples use these strategies as an attempt to protect us by managing and controlling the external environment, people, and situations to ensure that the parts of us who have been wounded are not hurt again.	Here are a few examples of how managers operate. Parts may have learned to protect by being high-achieving, depressed, or perfect. The high-achieving part may believe that the only way to have value is to out-achieve everyone else, and if the person receives praise for the strategies of this part, the part’s beliefs and behaviors are rewarded. A part that is depressed may remain in a state of hopelessness to protect the system from feeling something worse, like shame. Another way managers may protect us from feeling inadequate is by pursuing perfection. The perfectionistic part may believe that if it does everything perfectly, we will always feel good enough and we won’t have to experience the pain connected to feelings of worthlessness. The parts in these examples use these strategies as an attempt to protect us by managing and controlling the external environment, people, and situations to ensure that the parts of us who have been wounded are not hurt again.	Вот несколько примеров того, как работают менеджеры. Части, возможно, научились защищаться, будучи успешными, подавленными или совершенными. Достигающая часть может верить, что единственный способ добиться ценности — это превзойти всех остальных, и если человек получает похвалу за стратегии этой части, убеждения и поведение этой части вознаграждаются. Часть, находящаяся в депрессии, может оставаться в состоянии безнадежности, чтобы защитить систему от чувства чего-то худшего, например стыда. Еще один способ, которым менеджеры могут защитить нас от чувства неадекватности, — это стремление к совершенству. Перфекционистская часть может полагать, что если она сделает все идеально, мы всегда будем чувствовать себя достаточно хорошо и нам не придется испытывать боль, связанную с чувством никчемности. Части в этих примерах используют эти стратегии как попытку защитить нас, управляя и контролируя внешнюю среду, людей и ситуации, чтобы гарантировать, что те части нас, которые были ранены, не пострадают снова.	Here are a few examples of how managers operate. Parts may have learned to protect by being high-achieving, depressed, or perfect. The high-achieving part may believe that the only way to have value is to out-achieve everyone else, and if the person receives praise for the strategies of this part, the part’s beliefs and behaviors are rewarded. A part that is depressed may remain in a state of hopelessness to protect the system from feeling something worse, like shame. Another way managers may protect us from feeling inadequate is by pursuing perfection. The perfectionistic part may believe that if it does everything perfectly, we will always feel good enough and we won’t have to experience the pain connected to feelings of worthlessness. The parts in these examples use these strategies as an attempt to protect us by managing and controlling the external environment, people, and situations to ensure that the parts of us who have been wounded are not hurt again.
We also have parts that protect in a reactive manner by extinguishing the pain once we are already experiencing it. We call these parts firefighters. The behaviors, beliefs, and strategies they have developed are automatic, and they believe there are no alternatives. These reactive parts use tactics like dissociation, overeating, self-harm, and suicidal thoughts or actions because anything, even if it hurts us in some way, is better than the overwhelming feeling of vulnerability. When vulnerability is expressed, a reactive part may employ dissociation to take us away from feeling exposed. In the part’s mind, it is more desirable to be mentally whisked away from a situation than to risk emotional exposure or harm. Another shutdown tactic of reactive firefighter parts is self-harm. When the pain of wounded parts gets triggered, a part who uses self-harm may spring into action. The focus is immediately drawn away from emotional pain to the activity of harming the body. In a more extreme case, parts with suicidal thoughts/actions are protecting us too. Although this sounds counterintuitive, these parts remind us that if the pain becomes unbearable, we have a way out. The irony of parts with suicidal behaviors is they do not want us to die. They want the pain of living to cease and have no idea how to make that happen other than to kill us.	We also have parts that protect in a reactive manner by extinguishing the pain once we are already experiencing it. We call these parts firefighters. The behaviors, beliefs, and strategies they have developed are automatic, and they believe there are no alternatives. These reactive parts use tactics like dissociation, overeating, self-harm, and suicidal thoughts or actions because anything, even if it hurts us in some way, is better than the overwhelming feeling of vulnerability. When vulnerability is expressed, a reactive part may employ dissociation to take us away from feeling exposed. In the part’s mind, it is more desirable to be mentally whisked away from a situation than to risk emotional exposure or harm. Another shutdown tactic of reactive firefighter parts is self-harm. When the pain of wounded parts gets triggered, a part who uses self-harm may spring into action. The focus is immediately drawn away from emotional pain to the activity of harming the body. In a more extreme case, parts with suicidal thoughts/actions are protecting us too. Although this sounds counterintuitive, these parts remind us that if the pain becomes unbearable, we have a way out. The irony of parts with suicidal behaviors is they do not want us to die. They want the pain of living to cease and have no idea how to make that happen other than to kill us.	У нас также есть части, которые реагируют на защиту, подавляя боль, когда мы ее уже испытываем. Мы называем эти части пожарными. Поведение, убеждения и стратегии, которые они выработали, являются автоматическими, и они верят, что альтернативы нет. Эти реактивные части используют такие тактики, как диссоциация, переедание, членовредительство и суицидальные мысли или действия, потому что что угодно, даже если это каким-то образом причиняет нам боль, лучше, чем подавляющее чувство уязвимости. Когда уязвимость выражена, реактивная часть может использовать диссоциацию, чтобы увести нас от чувства незащищенности. По мнению части, более желательно мысленно отвлечься от ситуации, чем рисковать эмоциональным разоблачением или причинением вреда. Еще одна тактика отключения реактивных частей пожарных – членовредительство. Когда возникает боль в раненых частях, часть, которая применяет членовредительство, может начать действовать. Фокус внимания сразу же переключается с эмоциональной боли на деятельность по причинению вреда телу. В более крайнем случае нас также защищают части с суицидальными мыслями/действиями. Хотя это звучит нелогично, эти части напоминают нам, что если боль становится невыносимой, у нас есть выход. Ирония частей с суицидальным поведением заключается в том, что они не хотят, чтобы мы умерли. Они хотят, чтобы боль жизни прекратилась, и понятия не имеют, как это сделать, кроме как убить нас.	We also have parts that protect in a reactive manner by extinguishing the pain once we are already experiencing it. We call these parts firefighters. The behaviors, beliefs, and strategies they have developed are automatic, and they believe there are no alternatives. These reactive parts use tactics like dissociation, overeating, self-harm, and suicidal thoughts or actions because anything, even if it hurts us in some way, is better than the overwhelming feeling of vulnerability. When vulnerability is expressed, a reactive part may employ dissociation to take us away from feeling exposed. In the part’s mind, it is more desirable to be mentally whisked away from a situation than to risk emotional exposure or harm. Another shutdown tactic of reactive firefighter parts is self-harm. When the pain of wounded parts gets triggered, a part who uses self-harm may spring into action. The focus is immediately drawn away from emotional pain to the activity of harming the body. In a more extreme case, parts with suicidal thoughts/actions are protecting us too. Although this sounds counterintuitive, these parts remind us that if the pain becomes unbearable, we have a way out. The irony of parts with suicidal behaviors is they do not want us to die. They want the pain of living to cease and have no idea how to make that happen other than to kill us.
IFS CONCEPT 2: GO INSIDE	IFS CONCEPT 2: GO INSIDE	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: ВНУТРИ	IFS CONCEPT 2: GO INSIDE
(FIND, FOCUS, FEEL TOWARD)	(FIND, FOCUS, FEEL TOWARD)	(НАЙТИ, ФОКУСИРУЙТЕСЬ, ЧУВСТВУЙТЕ)	(FIND, FOCUS, FEEL TOWARD)
The overall goal of IFS therapy is to release parts from the roles they were forced into to protect us. We accomplish this by first noticing their presence. We notice by going inside. Our parts exist inside of us and sometimes slightly outside of us. To notice them, we need to move our attention from the external world to our internal one. We can do this by quietly closing our eyes, softening our gaze, or looking downward. Upon entering our internal world, we pause to notice who is present. Parts may present themselves as sensations, emotions, images, words, thoughts, memories, an inner voice, physical symptoms, or a felt sense. Once we turn our awareness inside, we may notice a sensation like tingling in the stomach. We want to pause and focus on that sensation. As we focus, we want to see what else is present. Often when we bring our attention to a part, it may expand, express other sides of itself, or remain the same. We might even experience another part expressing itself too. Whatever comes up is okay. We are simply noticing and focusing. Next, we want to ask, “How do I feel toward what I’m noticing?” We may feel uneasy, scared, calm, curious—a number of different feelings can surface. I will share more about this process in later chapters, but these are the beginning steps of going inside and noticing our parts.	The overall goal of IFS therapy is to release parts from the roles they were forced into to protect us. We accomplish this by first noticing their presence. We notice by going inside. Our parts exist inside of us and sometimes slightly outside of us. To notice them, we need to move our attention from the external world to our internal one. We can do this by quietly closing our eyes, softening our gaze, or looking downward. Upon entering our internal world, we pause to notice who is present. Parts may present themselves as sensations, emotions, images, words, thoughts, memories, an inner voice, physical symptoms, or a felt sense. Once we turn our awareness inside, we may notice a sensation like tingling in the stomach. We want to pause and focus on that sensation. As we focus, we want to see what else is present. Often when we bring our attention to a part, it may expand, express other sides of itself, or remain the same. We might even experience another part expressing itself too. Whatever comes up is okay. We are simply noticing and focusing. Next, we want to ask, “How do I feel toward what I’m noticing?” We may feel uneasy, scared, calm, curious—a number of different feelings can surface. I will share more about this process in later chapters, but these are the beginning steps of going inside and noticing our parts.	Общая цель терапии IFS — освободить части от ролей, которые они были вынуждены выполнять, чтобы защитить нас. Мы достигаем этого, сначала заметив их присутствие. Замечаем, зайдя внутрь. Наши части существуют внутри нас, а иногда и немного вне нас. Чтобы их заметить, нам необходимо переместить внимание с внешнего мира на свой внутренний. Мы можем сделать это, тихо закрыв глаза, смягчив взгляд или посмотрев вниз. Войдя в наш внутренний мир, мы останавливаемся, чтобы заметить, кто здесь присутствует. Части могут представлять собой ощущения, эмоции, образы, слова, мысли, воспоминания, внутренний голос, физические симптомы или ощущение. Как только мы направим свое осознание внутрь, мы можем заметить такое ощущение, как покалывание в желудке. Мы хотим сделать паузу и сосредоточиться на этом ощущении. Сосредотачиваясь, мы хотим увидеть, что еще присутствует. Часто, когда мы обращаем внимание на какую-то часть, она может расширяться, выражать другие стороны себя или оставаться прежней. Мы можем даже испытать выражение другой части. Что бы ни случилось, это нормально. Мы просто замечаем и концентрируемся. Далее мы хотим спросить: «Как я отношусь к тому, что замечаю?» Мы можем чувствовать себя неловко, испуганно, спокойно, любопытно — может возникнуть множество разных чувств. Я подробнее расскажу об этом процессе в последующих главах, но это лишь первые шаги, позволяющие проникнуть внутрь себя и заметить наши части.	The overall goal of IFS therapy is to release parts from the roles they were forced into to protect us. We accomplish this by first noticing their presence. We notice by going inside. Our parts exist inside of us and sometimes slightly outside of us. To notice them, we need to move our attention from the external world to our internal one. We can do this by quietly closing our eyes, softening our gaze, or looking downward. Upon entering our internal world, we pause to notice who is present. Parts may present themselves as sensations, emotions, images, words, thoughts, memories, an inner voice, physical symptoms, or a felt sense. Once we turn our awareness inside, we may notice a sensation like tingling in the stomach. We want to pause and focus on that sensation. As we focus, we want to see what else is present. Often when we bring our attention to a part, it may expand, express other sides of itself, or remain the same. We might even experience another part expressing itself too. Whatever comes up is okay. We are simply noticing and focusing. Next, we want to ask, “How do I feel toward what I’m noticing?” We may feel uneasy, scared, calm, curious—a number of different feelings can surface. I will share more about this process in later chapters, but these are the beginning steps of going inside and noticing our parts.
Case Vignette: Raging Firefighter	Case Vignette: Raging Firefighter	Пример из дела: Бешеный пожарный	Case Vignette: Raging Firefighter
The client, Romero, is a late-40s biracial male with a Black father and a white mother. He is gay, married to a Latino male for 12 years, and they have no children. Romero sought therapy because his partner threatened to end the marriage if he didn’t get help for his anger. Romero was sexually abused from ages 8 to 11 by a male family friend, and he admits that he carries a lot of anger about having his childhood “stolen in that way.” He and I started his IFS work with the part that was angry about being sexually abused.	The client, Romero, is a late-40s biracial male with a Black father and a white mother. He is gay, married to a Latino male for 12 years, and they have no children. Romero sought therapy because his partner threatened to end the marriage if he didn’t get help for his anger. Romero was sexually abused from ages 8 to 11 by a male family friend, and he admits that he carries a lot of anger about having his childhood “stolen in that way.” He and I started his IFS work with the part that was angry about being sexually abused.	Клиент, Ромеро, мужчина разной расы около 40 лет, у него черный отец и белая мать. Он гей, женат на латиноамериканце 12 лет, детей у них нет. Ромеро обратился за помощью, потому что его партнер угрожал расторгнуть брак, если он не получит помощи от своего гнева. Ромеро подвергался сексуальному насилию с 8 до 11 лет со стороны друга семьи-мужчины, и он признает, что очень злится из-за того, что его детство «украли таким образом». Мы с ним начали работу в IFS с той части, которая была недовольна сексуальным насилием.	The client, Romero, is a late-40s biracial male with a Black father and a white mother. He is gay, married to a Latino male for 12 years, and they have no children. Romero sought therapy because his partner threatened to end the marriage if he didn’t get help for his anger. Romero was sexually abused from ages 8 to 11 by a male family friend, and he admits that he carries a lot of anger about having his childhood “stolen in that way.” He and I started his IFS work with the part that was angry about being sexually abused.
It became clear early on that this part was not only angry about the sexual abuse but blamed Romero for what happened to him. The anger, rage, and disdain of this part became apparent in a session where Romero started to express sadness by crying about what happened to his younger self.	It became clear early on that this part was not only angry about the sexual abuse but blamed Romero for what happened to him. The anger, rage, and disdain of this part became apparent in a session where Romero started to express sadness by crying about what happened to his younger self.	Вскоре стало ясно, что эта часть не только была недовольна сексуальным насилием, но и винила Ромеро в том, что с ним произошло. Гнев, ярость и презрение этой части стали очевидными на сеансе, где Ромеро начал выражать печаль, плача о том, что случилось с ним в молодости.	It became clear early on that this part was not only angry about the sexual abuse but blamed Romero for what happened to him. The anger, rage, and disdain of this part became apparent in a session where Romero started to express sadness by crying about what happened to his younger self.
“What the fuck are you crying for?” the part barked and glared. I had an awareness that the tender feelings Romero was expressing toward his younger self had been usurped by another part. The new part in the driver’s seat seemed to hold contempt for the tears. I asked the part, “Who are you?” and he answered, “I’m Byron, who the fuck are you?” I let Byron know that I was Romero’s therapist and that I was here to help Romero.	“What the fuck are you crying for?” the part barked and glared. I had an awareness that the tender feelings Romero was expressing toward his younger self had been usurped by another part. The new part in the driver’s seat seemed to hold contempt for the tears. I asked the part, “Who are you?” and he answered, “I’m Byron, who the fuck are you?” I let Byron know that I was Romero’s therapist and that I was here to help Romero.	— Какого черта ты плачешь? часть лаяла и впилась взглядом. Я осознавал, что нежные чувства, которые Ромеро выражал по отношению к себе в молодости, были узурпированы другой частью. Новая деталь водительского сиденья, казалось, сдерживала слезы презрения. Я спросил часть: «Кто ты?» и он ответил: «Я Байрон, а ты кто, черт возьми?» Я сообщил Байрону, что я терапевт Ромеро и что я здесь, чтобы помочь Ромеро.	“What the fuck are you crying for?” the part barked and glared. I had an awareness that the tender feelings Romero was expressing toward his younger self had been usurped by another part. The new part in the driver’s seat seemed to hold contempt for the tears. I asked the part, “Who are you?” and he answered, “I’m Byron, who the fuck are you?” I let Byron know that I was Romero’s therapist and that I was here to help Romero.
“Good luck, his punk-ass can’t be helped,” Byron spat. I got the sense that Byron didn’t like Romero, and I asked him why he spoke so harshly toward him.	“Good luck, his punk-ass can’t be helped,” Byron spat. I got the sense that Byron didn’t like Romero, and I asked him why he spoke so harshly toward him.	«Удачи, с его панк-задницей ничего не поделаешь», — выплюнул Байрон. У меня возникло ощущение, что Байрону не нравится Ромеро, и я спросил его, почему он так резко обращается с ним.	“Good luck, his punk-ass can’t be helped,” Byron spat. I got the sense that Byron didn’t like Romero, and I asked him why he spoke so harshly toward him.
“Damn, do you really need to ask? Just look at him. Weak, good for nothing.”	“Damn, do you really need to ask? Just look at him. Weak, good for nothing.”	— Блин, тебе правда нужно спрашивать? Просто посмотрите на него. Слабый, ни на что не годный».	“Damn, do you really need to ask? Just look at him. Weak, good for nothing.”
“Tell me more about how you came to view him this way.”	“Tell me more about how you came to view him this way.”	«Расскажи мне подробнее, как ты начал смотреть на него таким образом».	“Tell me more about how you came to view him this way.”
With a mean mug scowl, Byron said, “Only a punk would let a man rape him.”	With a mean mug scowl, Byron said, “Only a punk would let a man rape him.”	Со злобным выражением лица Байрон сказал: «Только панк позволил бы мужчине изнасиловать себя».	With a mean mug scowl, Byron said, “Only a punk would let a man rape him.”
“So, you believe it was Romero’s fault that his abuser hurt him.”	“So, you believe it was Romero’s fault that his abuser hurt him.”	«Итак, вы считаете, что Ромеро был виноват в том, что его обидчик причинил ему боль».	“So, you believe it was Romero’s fault that his abuser hurt him.”
“Of course. He’s weak and didn’t stand up for himself. Like now, he’s crying and snotting about things he can’t change. He needs to man up.”	“Of course. He’s weak and didn’t stand up for himself. Like now, he’s crying and snotting about things he can’t change. He needs to man up.”	"Конечно. Он слабый и не постоял за себя. Как и сейчас, он плачет и сопит о вещах, которые не может изменить. Ему нужно набраться мужества».	“Of course. He’s weak and didn’t stand up for himself. Like now, he’s crying and snotting about things he can’t change. He needs to man up.”
“Let me get this straight: You stepped in because Romero was crying and feeling the pain of what happened to him?”	“Let me get this straight: You stepped in because Romero was crying and feeling the pain of what happened to him?”	«Позвольте мне сказать прямо: вы вмешались, потому что Ромеро плакал и чувствовал боль от того, что с ним случилось?»	“Let me get this straight: You stepped in because Romero was crying and feeling the pain of what happened to him?”
“Right, he doesn’t need to feel that shit, and if he does, I shut it the fuck down.”	“Right, he doesn’t need to feel that shit, and if he does, I shut it the fuck down.”	«Правда, ему не нужно чувствовать это дерьмо, а если он это чувствует, то я выключу это, черт возьми».	“Right, he doesn’t need to feel that shit, and if he does, I shut it the fuck down.”
“Is your job to keep Romero from feeling pain?”	“Is your job to keep Romero from feeling pain?”	«Ваша задача — не давать Ромеро чувствовать боль?»	“Is your job to keep Romero from feeling pain?”
“His punk-ass couldn’t handle it if I didn’t.”	“His punk-ass couldn’t handle it if I didn’t.”	«Его панк-задница не справилась бы, если бы я этого не сделал».	“His punk-ass couldn’t handle it if I didn’t.”
Byron is true to his job as a firefighter. When Romero started experiencing the pain of his younger self who was abused, Byron turned the hose on full blast to extinguish Romero’s emotions. Initially, Byron would only talk to me. It took several months of sessions of Byron being in relationship with me before he was willing to consider being in relationship with Romero. Even when Byron warmed to the idea of him and Romero getting to know each other, he was skeptical: “I’ll try this shit, but nothing’s going to change.”	Byron is true to his job as a firefighter. When Romero started experiencing the pain of his younger self who was abused, Byron turned the hose on full blast to extinguish Romero’s emotions. Initially, Byron would only talk to me. It took several months of sessions of Byron being in relationship with me before he was willing to consider being in relationship with Romero. Even when Byron warmed to the idea of him and Romero getting to know each other, he was skeptical: “I’ll try this shit, but nothing’s going to change.”	Байрон верен своей работе пожарного. Когда Ромеро начал испытывать боль своего молодого себя, подвергшегося насилию, Байрон включил шланг на полную мощность, чтобы погасить эмоции Ромеро. Первоначально Байрон разговаривал только со мной. Потребовалось несколько месяцев отношений Байрона со мной, прежде чем он захотел рассмотреть возможность отношений с Ромеро. Даже когда Байрону понравилась идея о том, что он и Ромеро познакомятся друг с другом, он был настроен скептически: «Я попробую это дерьмо, но ничего не изменится».	Byron is true to his job as a firefighter. When Romero started experiencing the pain of his younger self who was abused, Byron turned the hose on full blast to extinguish Romero’s emotions. Initially, Byron would only talk to me. It took several months of sessions of Byron being in relationship with me before he was willing to consider being in relationship with Romero. Even when Byron warmed to the idea of him and Romero getting to know each other, he was skeptical: “I’ll try this shit, but nothing’s going to change.”
The other challenge within Romero’s system was the existence of parts who were afraid of Byron. Even when Byron consented to getting to know Romero, there were parts who were fearful of Romero’s safety if he got close to Byron. They believed Romero couldn’t handle Byron’s fury and disdain. Parts within our systems respond to firefighters the same way people in the world do. When firefighters express their rage in the world, some people respond by cowering and fearing them. The same thing happens internally. Once we worked with the parts that feared a relationship between Romero and Byron, we were able to shift our work to establishing a relationship between the two with my support.	The other challenge within Romero’s system was the existence of parts who were afraid of Byron. Even when Byron consented to getting to know Romero, there were parts who were fearful of Romero’s safety if he got close to Byron. They believed Romero couldn’t handle Byron’s fury and disdain. Parts within our systems respond to firefighters the same way people in the world do. When firefighters express their rage in the world, some people respond by cowering and fearing them. The same thing happens internally. Once we worked with the parts that feared a relationship between Romero and Byron, we were able to shift our work to establishing a relationship between the two with my support.	Другой проблемой в системе Ромеро было существование частей, которые боялись Байрона. Даже когда Байрон согласился познакомиться с Ромеро, были части, которые опасались за безопасность Ромеро, если он приблизится к Байрону. Они считали, что Ромеро не сможет справиться с яростью и пренебрежением Байрона. Части наших систем реагируют на пожарных так же, как и люди во всем мире. Когда пожарные выражают свою ярость всему миру, некоторые люди в ответ съеживаются и боятся их. То же самое происходит и внутри. Как только мы поработали с теми частями, которые опасались отношений между Ромеро и Байроном, мы смогли переключить нашу работу на установление отношений между ними при моей поддержке.	The other challenge within Romero’s system was the existence of parts who were afraid of Byron. Even when Byron consented to getting to know Romero, there were parts who were fearful of Romero’s safety if he got close to Byron. They believed Romero couldn’t handle Byron’s fury and disdain. Parts within our systems respond to firefighters the same way people in the world do. When firefighters express their rage in the world, some people respond by cowering and fearing them. The same thing happens internally. Once we worked with the parts that feared a relationship between Romero and Byron, we were able to shift our work to establishing a relationship between the two with my support.
Romero entered the conversation with Byron with compassion and curiosity. He had a true desire to understand Byron’s harshness toward him. Being in the presence of curiosity instead of judgment or fear was a new experience for Byron. It helped him to decrease his intensity. Byron was encouraged to tell Romero about himself. “I have to be mean to toughen you up,” he said.	Romero entered the conversation with Byron with compassion and curiosity. He had a true desire to understand Byron’s harshness toward him. Being in the presence of curiosity instead of judgment or fear was a new experience for Byron. It helped him to decrease his intensity. Byron was encouraged to tell Romero about himself. “I have to be mean to toughen you up,” he said.	Ромеро вступил в разговор с Байроном с состраданием и любопытством. У него было искреннее желание понять резкость Байрона по отношению к нему. Быть в присутствии любопытства, а не осуждения или страха, было для Байрона новым опытом. Это помогло ему снизить интенсивность. Байрону было предложено рассказать Ромеро о себе. «Я должен быть жестоким, чтобы ужесточить тебя», — сказал он.	Romero entered the conversation with Byron with compassion and curiosity. He had a true desire to understand Byron’s harshness toward him. Being in the presence of curiosity instead of judgment or fear was a new experience for Byron. It helped him to decrease his intensity. Byron was encouraged to tell Romero about himself. “I have to be mean to toughen you up,” he said.
Romero asked, “Where did you learn to be so mean?”	Romero asked, “Where did you learn to be so mean?”	Ромеро спросил: «Где ты научился быть таким злым?»	Romero asked, “Where did you learn to be so mean?”
Byron paused thoughtfully and answered, “I learned from what happened to you. You need to be hard, strong, so no one will hurt you like that again. It’s my job to make you tough.” With this new information and clarity, I suggested that Romero ask Byron if he was aware that he was using demeaning and humiliating tactics like those of his abuser. Upon realizing he had become Romero’s internalized abuser, Byron lowered his head and voice and tearfully said, “No, I didn’t know that.”	Byron paused thoughtfully and answered, “I learned from what happened to you. You need to be hard, strong, so no one will hurt you like that again. It’s my job to make you tough.” With this new information and clarity, I suggested that Romero ask Byron if he was aware that he was using demeaning and humiliating tactics like those of his abuser. Upon realizing he had become Romero’s internalized abuser, Byron lowered his head and voice and tearfully said, “No, I didn’t know that.”	Байрон задумчиво сделал паузу и ответил: «Я узнал от того, что случилось с тобой. Тебе нужно быть твердым, сильным, чтобы никто больше не причинил тебе такой боли. Моя работа — сделать тебя крутым». Обладая этой новой информацией и ясностью, я предложил Ромеро спросить Байрона, знал ли он, что использует унизительную и унизительную тактику, подобную той, которую использовал его обидчик. Осознав, что он стал внутренним обидчиком Ромеро, Байрон опустил голову и голос и со слезами на глазах сказал: «Нет, я этого не знал».	Byron paused thoughtfully and answered, “I learned from what happened to you. You need to be hard, strong, so no one will hurt you like that again. It’s my job to make you tough.” With this new information and clarity, I suggested that Romero ask Byron if he was aware that he was using demeaning and humiliating tactics like those of his abuser. Upon realizing he had become Romero’s internalized abuser, Byron lowered his head and voice and tearfully said, “No, I didn’t know that.”
IFS CONCEPT 3: FIREFIGHTERS INTENT VS. IMPACT	IFS CONCEPT 3: FIREFIGHTERS INTENT VS. IMPACT	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 3: НАМЕРЕНИЯ ПОЖАРНЫХ VS. ВЛИЯНИЕ	IFS CONCEPT 3: FIREFIGHTERS INTENT VS. IMPACT
The intention of our firefighters is to protect us from pain and vulnerability. They are highly reactive to the experience or near experience of feelings that they view as harmful to us. They employ behaviors that are unacceptable in society and to parts within our internal systems. Firefighters get the message that what they do (rage, self-harm, use drugs, gamble, cheat on their partner, etc.) is objectionable. Managers within the system try to control and shut down their behavior, and people and systems in society attempt to shut them down too. However, they cannot cease their behavior until what they protect is healed.	The intention of our firefighters is to protect us from pain and vulnerability. They are highly reactive to the experience or near experience of feelings that they view as harmful to us. They employ behaviors that are unacceptable in society and to parts within our internal systems. Firefighters get the message that what they do (rage, self-harm, use drugs, gamble, cheat on their partner, etc.) is objectionable. Managers within the system try to control and shut down their behavior, and people and systems in society attempt to shut them down too. However, they cannot cease their behavior until what they protect is healed.	Цель наших пожарных — защитить нас от боли и уязвимости. Они очень сильно реагируют на переживание или близкое переживание чувств, которые они считают вредными для нас. Они используют поведение, которое неприемлемо для общества и для отдельных частей нашей внутренней системы. Пожарные понимают, что то, что они делают (гнев, членовредительство, употребление наркотиков, азартные игры, измена своему партнеру и т. д.), является нежелательным. Менеджеры внутри системы пытаются контролировать и подавлять их поведение, а люди и системы в обществе тоже пытаются их отключить. Однако они не могут прекратить свое поведение, пока то, что они защищают, не будет исцелено.	The intention of our firefighters is to protect us from pain and vulnerability. They are highly reactive to the experience or near experience of feelings that they view as harmful to us. They employ behaviors that are unacceptable in society and to parts within our internal systems. Firefighters get the message that what they do (rage, self-harm, use drugs, gamble, cheat on their partner, etc.) is objectionable. Managers within the system try to control and shut down their behavior, and people and systems in society attempt to shut them down too. However, they cannot cease their behavior until what they protect is healed.
Due to their ferocity in protecting, they are unaware of their negative impact. Firefighters impact on multiple levels. Often there are parts within the system that are fearful of the firefighters, like the parts within Romero that were afraid he would be further harmed by being in relationship with Byron. This is also true of people in our lives who have to relate to our reactive parts. We saw in the vignette that Romero’s partner had reached the point of possible divorce if he did not address his anger. We also saw that Byron had no idea of how his behavior was similar in nature to Romero’s abuser. Byron’s intention was not to abuse Romero further, but to make him strong so he could protect himself from abuse.	Due to their ferocity in protecting, they are unaware of their negative impact. Firefighters impact on multiple levels. Often there are parts within the system that are fearful of the firefighters, like the parts within Romero that were afraid he would be further harmed by being in relationship with Byron. This is also true of people in our lives who have to relate to our reactive parts. We saw in the vignette that Romero’s partner had reached the point of possible divorce if he did not address his anger. We also saw that Byron had no idea of how his behavior was similar in nature to Romero’s abuser. Byron’s intention was not to abuse Romero further, but to make him strong so he could protect himself from abuse.	Из-за своей свирепости в защите они не осознают своего негативного воздействия. Пожарные воздействуют на нескольких уровнях. Часто в системе есть части, которые боятся пожарных, например, части внутри Ромеро, которые боялись, что отношения с Байроном причинят ему еще больший вред. Это также верно и в отношении людей в нашей жизни, которым приходится иметь дело с нашими реактивными частями. В эпизоде ​​мы видели, что партнер Ромеро дошел до точки возможного развода, если бы он не обратился к своему гневу. Мы также видели, что Байрон понятия не имел, насколько его поведение по своей природе похоже на поведение обидчика Ромеро. Намерением Байрона было не продолжать оскорблять Ромеро, а сделать его сильным, чтобы он мог защитить себя от оскорблений.	Due to their ferocity in protecting, they are unaware of their negative impact. Firefighters impact on multiple levels. Often there are parts within the system that are fearful of the firefighters, like the parts within Romero that were afraid he would be further harmed by being in relationship with Byron. This is also true of people in our lives who have to relate to our reactive parts. We saw in the vignette that Romero’s partner had reached the point of possible divorce if he did not address his anger. We also saw that Byron had no idea of how his behavior was similar in nature to Romero’s abuser. Byron’s intention was not to abuse Romero further, but to make him strong so he could protect himself from abuse.
In the same way Romero got to know his part Byron who carried the anger of his abuse, you can begin to get to know your parts. One of the reasons for coming into a relationship with your parts is to understand their positive intentions, not just their impact. Remember one of the assumptions of IFS is that all parts are well-intentioned, regardless of how they express themselves. I invite you to use the meditation and exercises in this chapter to begin to get to know at least one of your parts. You may want to start with one of your managers, as firefighters can be more challenging. If you would like to listen to the meditation, a recording is available for you to download. You can find instructions for accessing the recording at the end of the book. So, pull out your journal and begin the exploration of your internal family system.	In the same way Romero got to know his part Byron who carried the anger of his abuse, you can begin to get to know your parts. One of the reasons for coming into a relationship with your parts is to understand their positive intentions, not just their impact. Remember one of the assumptions of IFS is that all parts are well-intentioned, regardless of how they express themselves. I invite you to use the meditation and exercises in this chapter to begin to get to know at least one of your parts. You may want to start with one of your managers, as firefighters can be more challenging. If you would like to listen to the meditation, a recording is available for you to download. You can find instructions for accessing the recording at the end of the book. So, pull out your journal and begin the exploration of your internal family system.	Точно так же, как Ромеро познакомился со своей ролью Байрона, который нес в себе гнев своих оскорблений, вы можете начать знакомиться со своими партиями. Одна из причин установления отношений со своими частями — это понимание их позитивных намерений, а не только их влияния. Помните, что одно из предположений IFS заключается в том, что все части имеют благие намерения, независимо от того, как они выражают себя. Я предлагаю вам использовать медитацию и упражнения из этой главы, чтобы начать познавать хотя бы одну из своих частей. Возможно, вы захотите начать с одного из своих менеджеров, поскольку с пожарными может быть сложнее. Если вы хотите послушать медитацию, вы можете скачать ее запись. Инструкции по доступу к записи вы найдете в конце книги. Итак, достаньте свой дневник и начните исследование своей внутренней семейной системы.	In the same way Romero got to know his part Byron who carried the anger of his abuse, you can begin to get to know your parts. One of the reasons for coming into a relationship with your parts is to understand their positive intentions, not just their impact. Remember one of the assumptions of IFS is that all parts are well-intentioned, regardless of how they express themselves. I invite you to use the meditation and exercises in this chapter to begin to get to know at least one of your parts. You may want to start with one of your managers, as firefighters can be more challenging. If you would like to listen to the meditation, a recording is available for you to download. You can find instructions for accessing the recording at the end of the book. So, pull out your journal and begin the exploration of your internal family system.
Meditation: Connecting Inside	Meditation: Connecting Inside	Медитация: соединение внутри	Meditation: Connecting Inside
Awareness of our parts and the ability to connect and build relationships with them is foundational to the healing process. As I explained in the introduction, most of the meditations in this book were co-created with the ancestors of my mother’s mother’s line.	Awareness of our parts and the ability to connect and build relationships with them is foundational to the healing process. As I explained in the introduction, most of the meditations in this book were co-created with the ancestors of my mother’s mother’s line.	Осознание наших частей и способность соединяться и строить с ними отношения лежат в основе процесса исцеления. Как я объяснил во введении, большинство медитаций в этой книге были созданы совместно с предками по материнской линии моей матери.	Awareness of our parts and the ability to connect and build relationships with them is foundational to the healing process. As I explained in the introduction, most of the meditations in this book were co-created with the ancestors of my mother’s mother’s line.
This meditation helps you go inside, notice part(s), and learn a little about them by connecting.	This meditation helps you go inside, notice part(s), and learn a little about them by connecting.	Эта медитация поможет вам проникнуть внутрь себя, заметить части и узнать немного о них, соединившись.	This meditation helps you go inside, notice part(s), and learn a little about them by connecting.
Bring your attention to your breath.	Bring your attention to your breath.	Перенесите внимание на свое дыхание.	Bring your attention to your breath.
Notice how your breath moves in and out of your body.	Notice how your breath moves in and out of your body.	Обратите внимание, как ваше дыхание входит и выходит из вашего тела.	Notice how your breath moves in and out of your body.
Move your attention from your external world to your internal world by closing your eyes or softening your gaze, or whatever feels comfortable for you.	Move your attention from your external world to your internal world by closing your eyes or softening your gaze, or whatever feels comfortable for you.	Переместите свое внимание с внешнего мира на мир внутренний, закрыв глаза или смягчив взгляд, или как вам удобно.	Move your attention from your external world to your internal world by closing your eyes or softening your gaze, or whatever feels comfortable for you.
As you go inside, see if you can notice the presence of a part.	As you go inside, see if you can notice the presence of a part.	Зайдя внутрь, посмотрите, сможете ли вы заметить наличие какой-либо детали.	As you go inside, see if you can notice the presence of a part.
Whatever is present is okay. Be with whatever shows itself.	Whatever is present is okay. Be with whatever shows itself.	Все, что есть, в порядке. Будьте со всем, что проявляется.	Whatever is present is okay. Be with whatever shows itself.
Now take a closer look. What more do you notice about the part?	Now take a closer look. What more do you notice about the part?	Теперь присмотритесь. Что еще вы заметили в этой части?	Now take a closer look. What more do you notice about the part?
Is there a color?	Is there a color?	Есть цвет?	Is there a color?
Do you notice a bodily sensation?	Do you notice a bodily sensation?	Замечаете ли вы телесные ощущения?	Do you notice a bodily sensation?
What does it say, if anything?	What does it say, if anything?	Что там написано, если что?	What does it say, if anything?
Ask the part its name.	Ask the part its name.	Спросите у части ее название.	Ask the part its name.
Let the part know you’re there while allowing it to be however it needs to be.	Let the part know you’re there while allowing it to be however it needs to be.	Дайте части знать, что вы рядом, позволяя ей быть такой, какой она должна быть.	Let the part know you’re there while allowing it to be however it needs to be.
Take note of what else it shows or shares with you.	Take note of what else it shows or shares with you.	Обратите внимание на то, что еще он показывает или чем делится с вами.	Take note of what else it shows or shares with you.
Are you curious to know more about this part?	Are you curious to know more about this part?	Вам интересно узнать больше об этой части?	Are you curious to know more about this part?
If so, you might ask, “What do you want me to know about you?”	If so, you might ask, “What do you want me to know about you?”	Если да, вы можете спросить: «Что вы хотите, чтобы я знал о вас?»	If so, you might ask, “What do you want me to know about you?”
Listen with openness and curiosity.	Listen with openness and curiosity.	Слушайте открыто и с любопытством.	Listen with openness and curiosity.
Encourage the part to share as much of its experience as it would like.	Encourage the part to share as much of its experience as it would like.	Поощряйте часть поделиться своим опытом настолько, насколько она пожелает.	Encourage the part to share as much of its experience as it would like.
When that feels complete, ask the part what it needs from you.	When that feels complete, ask the part what it needs from you.	Когда вы почувствуете, что все готово, спросите часть, что ей от вас нужно.	When that feels complete, ask the part what it needs from you.
After you learn what the part needs, see if there’s anything else it wants to share.	After you learn what the part needs, see if there’s anything else it wants to share.	После того, как вы узнаете, что нужно этой части, посмотрите, есть ли еще что-нибудь, чем она хочет поделиться.	After you learn what the part needs, see if there’s anything else it wants to share.
Set an intention to come back and connect with the part again.	Set an intention to come back and connect with the part again.	Установите намерение вернуться и снова соединиться с этой частью.	Set an intention to come back and connect with the part again.
If it feels right, express appreciation.	If it feels right, express appreciation.	Если это кажется правильным, выразите признательность.	If it feels right, express appreciation.
Slowly bring your awareness back to your breath.	Slowly bring your awareness back to your breath.	Медленно верните свое внимание к дыханию.	Slowly bring your awareness back to your breath.
Open your eyes when you’re ready.	Open your eyes when you’re ready.	Откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Open your eyes when you’re ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.	Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.	Достаньте свой дневник и быстро запишите все, что вы хотели бы уловить из этой медитации. Это может быть откровение, размышление, мимолетная мысль или чувственное восприятие.	Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.
Exercise 2: Connecting Inside Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Connecting Inside Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Объединение внутренних вопросов журнала	Exercise 2: Connecting Inside Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Connecting Inside meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Connecting Inside meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили медитацию «Соединение внутри» и написали быстрый «Захват журнала», потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, ответив на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Connecting Inside meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
How are you feeling after connecting with your part?	How are you feeling after connecting with your part?	Что вы чувствуете после соединения со своей частью?	How are you feeling after connecting with your part?
If you were not able to connect with a part, what happened inside?	If you were not able to connect with a part, what happened inside?	Если вам не удалось соединиться с деталью, что произошло внутри?	If you were not able to connect with a part, what happened inside?
What did you learn about your part?	What did you learn about your part?	Что вы узнали о своей роли?	What did you learn about your part?
If your part expressed itself as a bodily sensation, describe where and what you experienced?	If your part expressed itself as a bodily sensation, describe where and what you experienced?	Если ваша часть выражалась в телесном ощущении, опишите, где и что вы испытали?	If your part expressed itself as a bodily sensation, describe where and what you experienced?
How does this part show up in your life?	How does this part show up in your life?	Как эта часть проявляется в вашей жизни?	How does this part show up in your life?
How will you honor what the part needs from you?	How will you honor what the part needs from you?	Как вы будете соблюдать то, что эта часть требует от вас?	How will you honor what the part needs from you?
What intentions did you set with your part?	What intentions did you set with your part?	Какие намерения вы поставили перед собой?	What intentions did you set with your part?
Exercise 3: Connecting Inside	Exercise 3: Connecting Inside	Упражнение 3: Внутреннее соединение	Exercise 3: Connecting Inside
Take a moment to go inside and connect with your part again. Notice how you experience the part, then ask the part how it would like you to draw or represent it. Then draw it in your journal. The level of artistry is unimportant. Parts may want to be drawn simply, as a zigzag line or a circle, or with greater detail. When you are clear about how it wants to be represented, draw the part.	Take a moment to go inside and connect with your part again. Notice how you experience the part, then ask the part how it would like you to draw or represent it. Then draw it in your journal. The level of artistry is unimportant. Parts may want to be drawn simply, as a zigzag line or a circle, or with greater detail. When you are clear about how it wants to be represented, draw the part.	Найдите минутку, чтобы войти внутрь и снова соединиться со своей частью. Обратите внимание на то, как вы воспринимаете эту часть, затем спросите ее, как бы она хотела, чтобы вы ее нарисовали или представили. Затем нарисуйте это в своем дневнике. Уровень артистизма неважен. Части могут быть нарисованы просто, в виде зигзагообразной линии или круга, или с большей детализацией. Когда вы поймете, как она должна быть представлена, нарисуйте деталь.	Take a moment to go inside and connect with your part again. Notice how you experience the part, then ask the part how it would like you to draw or represent it. Then draw it in your journal. The level of artistry is unimportant. Parts may want to be drawn simply, as a zigzag line or a circle, or with greater detail. When you are clear about how it wants to be represented, draw the part.
After drawing the picture, answer the questions below.	After drawing the picture, answer the questions below.	Нарисовав картинку, ответьте на вопросы ниже.	After drawing the picture, answer the questions below.
What more do you notice about the part?	What more do you notice about the part?	Что еще вы заметили в этой части?	What more do you notice about the part?
As you look at the picture, ask the part, “Is there anything else you want me to know about you?”	As you look at the picture, ask the part, “Is there anything else you want me to know about you?”	Глядя на картинку, спросите часть: «Есть ли что-нибудь еще, что ты хочешь, чтобы я знал о тебе?»	As you look at the picture, ask the part, “Is there anything else you want me to know about you?”
How can you remain in connection with this part of yourself?	How can you remain in connection with this part of yourself?	Как вы можете оставаться в связи с этой частью себя?	How can you remain in connection with this part of yourself?
CHAPTER 3	CHAPTER 3	ГЛАВА 3	CHAPTER 3
The Meadow	The Meadow	Луг	The Meadow
Young and Vulnerable Parts	Young and Vulnerable Parts	Молодые и уязвимые части	Young and Vulnerable Parts
Raised voices scare me. I don’t know what will happen next. Something bad usually happens after the shouting. Don’t they know their voices make me shake inside? When I shake, I cry. Hi, I’m five and they call me Cry Baby. I don’t think that’s my real name, but it’s the one everyone calls me. I didn’t think crying was bad or good. I just cry when I need to. But most of the big people tell me, “Don’t cry. Be a big girl.” I hear that a lot. Crying must be bad. Why else would they tell me not to do it? It’s confusing because crying makes me feel better. So, if I feel like I’m going to cry, I try hard to hold it in. If I can’t hold it in, I cry alone in my room, the bathroom, outside, anywhere no one will see me crying. I wonder if something is wrong with me. Maybe that’s why I cry so much. I wish they could feel what it’s like inside of me. I have big, big feelings. Some of them are bigger than me. When I feel happy, I get silly and giggly. When I feel sad or scared, I hide and cry. When I feel mad, my body gets hot, and I yell. I think happy is good because the big people like it when I’m happy.	Raised voices scare me. I don’t know what will happen next. Something bad usually happens after the shouting. Don’t they know their voices make me shake inside? When I shake, I cry. Hi, I’m five and they call me Cry Baby. I don’t think that’s my real name, but it’s the one everyone calls me. I didn’t think crying was bad or good. I just cry when I need to. But most of the big people tell me, “Don’t cry. Be a big girl.” I hear that a lot. Crying must be bad. Why else would they tell me not to do it? It’s confusing because crying makes me feel better. So, if I feel like I’m going to cry, I try hard to hold it in. If I can’t hold it in, I cry alone in my room, the bathroom, outside, anywhere no one will see me crying. I wonder if something is wrong with me. Maybe that’s why I cry so much. I wish they could feel what it’s like inside of me. I have big, big feelings. Some of them are bigger than me. When I feel happy, I get silly and giggly. When I feel sad or scared, I hide and cry. When I feel mad, my body gets hot, and I yell. I think happy is good because the big people like it when I’m happy.	Меня пугают повышенные голоса. Я не знаю, что будет дальше. После крика обычно случается что-то плохое. Разве они не знают, что их голоса заставляют меня трястись изнутри? Когда меня трясёт, я плачу. Привет, мне пять лет, и меня зовут Плакса. Не думаю, что это мое настоящее имя, но все меня так называют. Я не думала, что плакать — это плохо или хорошо. Я просто плачу, когда мне нужно. Но большинство больших людей говорят мне: «Не плачь. Будь большой девочкой». Я часто это слышу. Плакать, должно быть, плохо. Почему еще они сказали бы мне не делать этого? Это сбивает с толку, потому что от плача я чувствую себя лучше. Итак, если я чувствую, что собираюсь заплакать, я изо всех сил стараюсь сдержать это. Если я не могу сдержать это, я плачу один в своей комнате, в ванной, на улице, везде, где никто не увидит, как я плачу. Интересно, не случилось ли со мной чего-нибудь? Может быть, поэтому я так плачу. Мне бы хотелось, чтобы они почувствовали, каково это внутри меня. У меня большие, большие чувства. Некоторые из них больше меня. Когда я чувствую себя счастливым, я становлюсь глупым и хихикаю. Когда мне грустно или страшно, я прячусь и плачу. Когда я злюсь, мое тело становится горячим, и я кричу. Я думаю, что быть счастливым — это хорошо, потому что большим людям нравится, когда я счастлив.	Raised voices scare me. I don’t know what will happen next. Something bad usually happens after the shouting. Don’t they know their voices make me shake inside? When I shake, I cry. Hi, I’m five and they call me Cry Baby. I don’t think that’s my real name, but it’s the one everyone calls me. I didn’t think crying was bad or good. I just cry when I need to. But most of the big people tell me, “Don’t cry. Be a big girl.” I hear that a lot. Crying must be bad. Why else would they tell me not to do it? It’s confusing because crying makes me feel better. So, if I feel like I’m going to cry, I try hard to hold it in. If I can’t hold it in, I cry alone in my room, the bathroom, outside, anywhere no one will see me crying. I wonder if something is wrong with me. Maybe that’s why I cry so much. I wish they could feel what it’s like inside of me. I have big, big feelings. Some of them are bigger than me. When I feel happy, I get silly and giggly. When I feel sad or scared, I hide and cry. When I feel mad, my body gets hot, and I yell. I think happy is good because the big people like it when I’m happy.
I don’t think they know, but I feel their feelings too. I’m a sponge for feelings. Sometimes I wonder if the feelings are mine or not mine. It gets hard to tell. They get jumbly inside. Somehow, I know when other people are happy, mad, sad, or scared without them telling me. I feel it in my body. I think sometimes my tears aren’t mine but theirs.	I don’t think they know, but I feel their feelings too. I’m a sponge for feelings. Sometimes I wonder if the feelings are mine or not mine. It gets hard to tell. They get jumbly inside. Somehow, I know when other people are happy, mad, sad, or scared without them telling me. I feel it in my body. I think sometimes my tears aren’t mine but theirs.	Не думаю, что они знают, но я тоже чувствую их чувства. Я губка для чувств. Иногда я задаюсь вопросом, мои ли это чувства или не мои. Трудно сказать. Внутри они получаются беспорядочными. Каким-то образом я знаю, когда другие люди счастливы, злятся, грустят или напуганы, хотя они мне об этом не говорят. Я чувствую это в своем теле. Я думаю, что иногда мои слезы не мои, а их.	I don’t think they know, but I feel their feelings too. I’m a sponge for feelings. Sometimes I wonder if the feelings are mine or not mine. It gets hard to tell. They get jumbly inside. Somehow, I know when other people are happy, mad, sad, or scared without them telling me. I feel it in my body. I think sometimes my tears aren’t mine but theirs.
Oh no, I hear my mother shouting for me, “Tamala! Come here! Get in here right now!” I run as fast as I can and find her in the den of my grandmother’s house. Her tone of voice scares me. I try to hold back the tears, but I can’t. My mother yells, “What are you crying for?” This makes me cry harder. “Tamala, I only called you in here. This crying doesn’t make any sense. Stop it! Stop it now!” My grandmother adds, “Stop all that crying. Nothing’s wrong. You can’t be that sensitive!” Hearing how my mother and grandmother respond to my tears convinces me that crying and being sensitive is bad. I decide I will work harder to not cry and be less sensitive, whatever that means.	Oh no, I hear my mother shouting for me, “Tamala! Come here! Get in here right now!” I run as fast as I can and find her in the den of my grandmother’s house. Her tone of voice scares me. I try to hold back the tears, but I can’t. My mother yells, “What are you crying for?” This makes me cry harder. “Tamala, I only called you in here. This crying doesn’t make any sense. Stop it! Stop it now!” My grandmother adds, “Stop all that crying. Nothing’s wrong. You can’t be that sensitive!” Hearing how my mother and grandmother respond to my tears convinces me that crying and being sensitive is bad. I decide I will work harder to not cry and be less sensitive, whatever that means.	О нет, я слышу, как моя мать кричит мне: «Тамала! Идите сюда! Иди сюда прямо сейчас!» Я бегу изо всех сил и нахожу ее в берлоге бабушкиного дома. Меня пугает ее тон голоса. Я пытаюсь сдержать слезы, но не могу. Мама кричит: «О чем ты плачешь?» Это заставляет меня плакать сильнее. «Тамала, я только позвал тебя сюда. Этот плач не имеет никакого смысла. Прекрати! Прекрати это сейчас же!» Моя бабушка добавляет: «Хватит плакать. Все в порядке. Ты не можешь быть таким чувствительным!» То, как мама и бабушка реагируют на мои слезы, убеждает меня, что плакать и быть чувствительным — это плохо. Я решаю, что буду усерднее работать, чтобы не плакать и быть менее чувствительным, что бы это ни значило.	Oh no, I hear my mother shouting for me, “Tamala! Come here! Get in here right now!” I run as fast as I can and find her in the den of my grandmother’s house. Her tone of voice scares me. I try to hold back the tears, but I can’t. My mother yells, “What are you crying for?” This makes me cry harder. “Tamala, I only called you in here. This crying doesn’t make any sense. Stop it! Stop it now!” My grandmother adds, “Stop all that crying. Nothing’s wrong. You can’t be that sensitive!” Hearing how my mother and grandmother respond to my tears convinces me that crying and being sensitive is bad. I decide I will work harder to not cry and be less sensitive, whatever that means.
IFS CONCEPT 1: EXILES	IFS CONCEPT 1: EXILES	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: ИЗГНАННЫЕ	IFS CONCEPT 1: EXILES
Exiles are usually young, vulnerable parts of us that hide from awareness for self-protection or that protectors attempt to keep hidden for fear they will destabilize the system with their pain and vulnerability. When we are young and unburdened, these parts may express as joyous, curious, playful, and energetic. However, they receive the message from family, cultural groups, and society that their natural way of being is unacceptable. Children come to understand that who they are is not okay, and to receive love and care, they need to change who and how they are. This creates the need to exile or cut off parts of themselves from the whole. Children are vulnerable and dependent on adults, and if rejecting parts of themselves is the cost of their safety, love, and care, the system adjusts to increase the likelihood the child will receive the care needed to survive. The system will keep adjusting to outside forces, exiling more parts if necessary.	Exiles are usually young, vulnerable parts of us that hide from awareness for self-protection or that protectors attempt to keep hidden for fear they will destabilize the system with their pain and vulnerability. When we are young and unburdened, these parts may express as joyous, curious, playful, and energetic. However, they receive the message from family, cultural groups, and society that their natural way of being is unacceptable. Children come to understand that who they are is not okay, and to receive love and care, they need to change who and how they are. This creates the need to exile or cut off parts of themselves from the whole. Children are vulnerable and dependent on adults, and if rejecting parts of themselves is the cost of their safety, love, and care, the system adjusts to increase the likelihood the child will receive the care needed to survive. The system will keep adjusting to outside forces, exiling more parts if necessary.	Изгнанники – это обычно молодые, уязвимые части нас, которые прячутся от осознания в целях самозащиты или которых защитники пытаются скрыть из страха, что они дестабилизируют систему своей болью и уязвимостью. Когда мы молоды и не обременены, эти части могут проявляться как радостные, любопытные, игривые и энергичные. Однако они получают сообщение от семьи, культурных групп и общества о том, что их естественный образ жизни неприемлем. Дети приходят к пониманию того, что они не в порядке, и чтобы получить любовь и заботу, им нужно изменить то, кем и как они являются. Это порождает потребность изгнать или отрезать части себя от целого. Дети уязвимы и зависят от взрослых, и если отказ от части себя является ценой их безопасности, любви и заботы, система приспосабливается, чтобы увеличить вероятность того, что ребенок получит заботу, необходимую для выживания. Система будет продолжать приспосабливаться к внешним силам, при необходимости удаляя дополнительные части.	Exiles are usually young, vulnerable parts of us that hide from awareness for self-protection or that protectors attempt to keep hidden for fear they will destabilize the system with their pain and vulnerability. When we are young and unburdened, these parts may express as joyous, curious, playful, and energetic. However, they receive the message from family, cultural groups, and society that their natural way of being is unacceptable. Children come to understand that who they are is not okay, and to receive love and care, they need to change who and how they are. This creates the need to exile or cut off parts of themselves from the whole. Children are vulnerable and dependent on adults, and if rejecting parts of themselves is the cost of their safety, love, and care, the system adjusts to increase the likelihood the child will receive the care needed to survive. The system will keep adjusting to outside forces, exiling more parts if necessary.
Exiling is the result of trauma, attachment injuries, and devaluing experiences. Traumatic events experienced in childhood include physical and emotional abuse, sexual abuse, physical and emotional neglect, abandonment, accidents, and injury. Attachment injuries occur when childhood caregivers are unable or unwilling to meet the child’s needs for care, comfort, affection, and attention. This can range from lack of attunement to complete disregard of needs. Devaluing experiences include bullying, shaming, name-calling, disdainful looks, criticism, and rejection. Experiencing any one of these events or in combination in response to being your natural self as a child communicates the message that something is wrong with you. Children are motivated to fit the norms of family, school, culture, and community; therefore, parts are exiled to conform.	Exiling is the result of trauma, attachment injuries, and devaluing experiences. Traumatic events experienced in childhood include physical and emotional abuse, sexual abuse, physical and emotional neglect, abandonment, accidents, and injury. Attachment injuries occur when childhood caregivers are unable or unwilling to meet the child’s needs for care, comfort, affection, and attention. This can range from lack of attunement to complete disregard of needs. Devaluing experiences include bullying, shaming, name-calling, disdainful looks, criticism, and rejection. Experiencing any one of these events or in combination in response to being your natural self as a child communicates the message that something is wrong with you. Children are motivated to fit the norms of family, school, culture, and community; therefore, parts are exiled to conform.	Изгнание — результат травмы, травм привязанности и обесценивания опыта. Травматические события, пережитые в детстве, включают физическое и эмоциональное насилие, сексуальное насилие, физическое и эмоциональное пренебрежение, отказ, несчастные случаи и травмы. Травмы привязанности возникают, когда лица, осуществляющие уход за детьми, не могут или не желают удовлетворить потребности ребенка в заботе, комфорте, привязанности и внимании. Это может варьироваться от отсутствия настройки до полного игнорирования потребностей. Опыт обесценивания включает в себя издевательства, стыд, обзывательства, презрительные взгляды, критику и неприятие. Переживание любого из этих событий или их комбинации в ответ на то, что вы являетесь самим собой в детстве, передает сообщение о том, что с вами что-то не так. Дети мотивированы соответствовать нормам семьи, школы, культуры и сообщества; следовательно, части изгнаны, чтобы соответствовать.	Exiling is the result of trauma, attachment injuries, and devaluing experiences. Traumatic events experienced in childhood include physical and emotional abuse, sexual abuse, physical and emotional neglect, abandonment, accidents, and injury. Attachment injuries occur when childhood caregivers are unable or unwilling to meet the child’s needs for care, comfort, affection, and attention. This can range from lack of attunement to complete disregard of needs. Devaluing experiences include bullying, shaming, name-calling, disdainful looks, criticism, and rejection. Experiencing any one of these events or in combination in response to being your natural self as a child communicates the message that something is wrong with you. Children are motivated to fit the norms of family, school, culture, and community; therefore, parts are exiled to conform.
IFS CONCEPT 2: BURDENS	IFS CONCEPT 2: BURDENS	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: бремя	IFS CONCEPT 2: BURDENS
Burdens are extreme emotions, beliefs, and energies absorbed by parts because of trauma, attachment injury, and devaluing experiences. Burdens are created through personal interactions, cultural experiences, and generational transmission. Personal burdens are based on our firsthand or lived experiences. The natural state of my part that I shared at the beginning of this chapter was sensitivity to her own feelings/emotions and those of others. She felt deeply and was comfortable with expressing her feelings. However, she received messages from her family that her sensitivity was too much, it wasn’t okay to cry, and when she did, she was being a “cry baby.” The burden that this part acquired was the belief that she was too much, being sensitive and crying was bad, and she needed to hide those aspects of herself to be accepted and loved. Anytime she felt tearful emotion rising within, she would stifle it, and if she couldn’t stop it, she would apologize for the tears.	Burdens are extreme emotions, beliefs, and energies absorbed by parts because of trauma, attachment injury, and devaluing experiences. Burdens are created through personal interactions, cultural experiences, and generational transmission. Personal burdens are based on our firsthand or lived experiences. The natural state of my part that I shared at the beginning of this chapter was sensitivity to her own feelings/emotions and those of others. She felt deeply and was comfortable with expressing her feelings. However, she received messages from her family that her sensitivity was too much, it wasn’t okay to cry, and when she did, she was being a “cry baby.” The burden that this part acquired was the belief that she was too much, being sensitive and crying was bad, and she needed to hide those aspects of herself to be accepted and loved. Anytime she felt tearful emotion rising within, she would stifle it, and if she couldn’t stop it, she would apologize for the tears.	Бремя — это крайние эмоции, убеждения и энергии, поглощаемые частями из-за травм, травм привязанности и обесценивания опыта. Бремя создается в результате личных взаимодействий, культурного опыта и передачи из поколения в поколение. Личное бремя основано на нашем личном или жизненном опыте. Естественным состоянием моей части, о котором я рассказал в начале этой главы, была чувствительность к ее собственным чувствам/эмоциям и чувствам других. Она чувствовала себя глубоко и ей было удобно выражать свои чувства. Однако она получила сообщения от своей семьи о том, что ее чувствительность слишком велика, плакать нельзя, и когда она плакала, она вела себя как «плачущий ребенок». Бремя, которое приобрела эта часть, заключалось в убеждении, что она слишком сильная, быть чувствительной и плакать — это плохо, и ей нужно скрывать эти аспекты себя, чтобы ее приняли и полюбили. Каждый раз, когда она чувствовала, что внутри поднимаются слезливые эмоции, она подавляла их, а если не могла остановить, то извинялась за слезы.	Burdens are extreme emotions, beliefs, and energies absorbed by parts because of trauma, attachment injury, and devaluing experiences. Burdens are created through personal interactions, cultural experiences, and generational transmission. Personal burdens are based on our firsthand or lived experiences. The natural state of my part that I shared at the beginning of this chapter was sensitivity to her own feelings/emotions and those of others. She felt deeply and was comfortable with expressing her feelings. However, she received messages from her family that her sensitivity was too much, it wasn’t okay to cry, and when she did, she was being a “cry baby.” The burden that this part acquired was the belief that she was too much, being sensitive and crying was bad, and she needed to hide those aspects of herself to be accepted and loved. Anytime she felt tearful emotion rising within, she would stifle it, and if she couldn’t stop it, she would apologize for the tears.
Cultural burdens are those we absorb from the dominant culture. The four cultural burdens of the United States identified by Schwartz and Sweezy are racism, patriarchy, materialism, and individualism.1 There are also burdens passed down through family and ancestral lines that are not a part of the person’s lived experience; these are called legacy burdens. We’ll discuss cultural and legacy burdens more fully in Chapter 11. It is possible for burdens to be 100 percent personal; some combination of the types, such as part personal and part legacy; or a blend of all three types.	Cultural burdens are those we absorb from the dominant culture. The four cultural burdens of the United States identified by Schwartz and Sweezy are racism, patriarchy, materialism, and individualism.1 There are also burdens passed down through family and ancestral lines that are not a part of the person’s lived experience; these are called legacy burdens. We’ll discuss cultural and legacy burdens more fully in Chapter 11. It is possible for burdens to be 100 percent personal; some combination of the types, such as part personal and part legacy; or a blend of all three types.	Культурное бремя — это то, что мы впитываем из доминирующей культуры. Четыре культурных бремени Соединенных Штатов, определенные Шварцем и Суизи, — это расизм, патриархат, материализм и индивидуализм.1 Есть также бремя, передаваемое по семейным и наследственным линиям, которое не является частью жизненного опыта человека; это называется наследственным бременем. Мы более подробно обсудим бремя культурного наследия и наследия в главе 11. Бремя может быть на 100 процентов личным; некоторая комбинация типов, например частично личное и частично наследство; или смесь всех трех типов.	Cultural burdens are those we absorb from the dominant culture. The four cultural burdens of the United States identified by Schwartz and Sweezy are racism, patriarchy, materialism, and individualism.1 There are also burdens passed down through family and ancestral lines that are not a part of the person’s lived experience; these are called legacy burdens. We’ll discuss cultural and legacy burdens more fully in Chapter 11. It is possible for burdens to be 100 percent personal; some combination of the types, such as part personal and part legacy; or a blend of all three types.
IFS CONCEPT 3: WITNESSING	IFS CONCEPT 3: WITNESSING	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 3: СВИДЕТЕЛЬСТВО	IFS CONCEPT 3: WITNESSING
More than anything, exiles seek redemption and desire to tell their story. In their quest for redemption, they seek love and validation from the person who harmed them or someone who has qualities like that person. They are highly motivated to tell their story, which often causes them to behave in a needy manner. Faulty thinking causes them to believe that by letting others know what happened to them and being redeemed, they will feel validated, loved, and worthy. Our exiles cause us to lead with our trauma histories to bond with others. Exiles are often searching for the care they did not receive as children. Since Self is the healing energy in our system, it is being in relationship and sharing their stories with Self that results in exiles truly experiencing the love, care, and validation they seek.	More than anything, exiles seek redemption and desire to tell their story. In their quest for redemption, they seek love and validation from the person who harmed them or someone who has qualities like that person. They are highly motivated to tell their story, which often causes them to behave in a needy manner. Faulty thinking causes them to believe that by letting others know what happened to them and being redeemed, they will feel validated, loved, and worthy. Our exiles cause us to lead with our trauma histories to bond with others. Exiles are often searching for the care they did not receive as children. Since Self is the healing energy in our system, it is being in relationship and sharing their stories with Self that results in exiles truly experiencing the love, care, and validation they seek.	Больше всего изгнанники ищут искупления и желания рассказать свою историю. В своем стремлении к искуплению они ищут любви и одобрения от человека, который причинил им вред, или от человека, обладающего такими же качествами, как этот человек. У них высокая мотивация рассказать свою историю, что часто заставляет их вести себя униженно. Ошибочное мышление заставляет их верить, что, сообщив другим о том, что с ними произошло, и получив искупление, они почувствуют себя признанными, любимыми и достойными. Наши изгнанники заставляют нас вести за собой свои истории травм, чтобы сблизиться с другими. Ссыльные часто ищут заботу, которую они не получали в детстве. Поскольку «Я» — это исцеляющая энергия в нашей системе, именно отношения и обмен своими историями с «Я» приводят к тому, что изгнанники по-настоящему испытывают любовь, заботу и признание, которых они ищут.	More than anything, exiles seek redemption and desire to tell their story. In their quest for redemption, they seek love and validation from the person who harmed them or someone who has qualities like that person. They are highly motivated to tell their story, which often causes them to behave in a needy manner. Faulty thinking causes them to believe that by letting others know what happened to them and being redeemed, they will feel validated, loved, and worthy. Our exiles cause us to lead with our trauma histories to bond with others. Exiles are often searching for the care they did not receive as children. Since Self is the healing energy in our system, it is being in relationship and sharing their stories with Self that results in exiles truly experiencing the love, care, and validation they seek.
Witnessing is the beginning of the healing process for exiles. This is an exchange where exiles get to tell their story in the presence of a compassionate, curious, calm, and connected listener and witness. When exiles are engaged with any of the eight qualities of Self-energy, the process of reparenting begins. (I’ll talk more about these qualities in Chapter 4.) The exiles get to experience an adult being there for them in a way they may never have experienced in the past. Asking exiles what they want to share about their experiences, with genuine interest, encourages them to share their pains in words, bodily sensations, emotions, movement, images, and any other way that helps them to be understood by Self. It is important for Self to respond to what the exile is sharing to deepen trust and connection between the two of them. Asking if there’s more helps the exile share their story fully. No matter what or how the exile shares, Self can handle it and support them to tell their story until they feel heard and understood. The witnessing process is complete when the exile has nothing more to share and feels fully understood by Self.	Witnessing is the beginning of the healing process for exiles. This is an exchange where exiles get to tell their story in the presence of a compassionate, curious, calm, and connected listener and witness. When exiles are engaged with any of the eight qualities of Self-energy, the process of reparenting begins. (I’ll talk more about these qualities in Chapter 4.) The exiles get to experience an adult being there for them in a way they may never have experienced in the past. Asking exiles what they want to share about their experiences, with genuine interest, encourages them to share their pains in words, bodily sensations, emotions, movement, images, and any other way that helps them to be understood by Self. It is important for Self to respond to what the exile is sharing to deepen trust and connection between the two of them. Asking if there’s more helps the exile share their story fully. No matter what or how the exile shares, Self can handle it and support them to tell their story until they feel heard and understood. The witnessing process is complete when the exile has nothing more to share and feels fully understood by Self.	Свидетельствование – это начало процесса исцеления изгнанников. Это обмен мнениями, в ходе которого изгнанники могут рассказать свою историю в присутствии сострадательного, любопытного, спокойного и заинтересованного слушателя и свидетеля. Когда изгнанники занимаются любым из восьми качеств Само-энергии, начинается процесс перевоспитания. (Подробнее об этих качествах я расскажу в главе 4.) Изгнанники ощущают присутствие взрослого рядом с ними так, как они, возможно, никогда не испытывали в прошлом. Если с искренним интересом спросить изгнанников о том, чем они хотят поделиться о своем опыте, это побудит их поделиться своей болью словами, телесными ощущениями, эмоциями, движениями, образами и любым другим способом, который поможет им быть понятыми Самостью. Для Селфа важно отреагировать на то, чем делится изгнанник, чтобы углубить доверие и связь между ними двумя. Если спросить, есть ли еще что-нибудь, изгнанник сможет полностью рассказать свою историю. Независимо от того, что и как рассказывает изгнанник, «Селф» может справиться с этим и помочь ему рассказать свою историю, пока он не почувствует, что его услышали и поняли. Процесс свидетельствования завершается, когда изгнаннику больше нечем поделиться, и он чувствует, что его «Я» полностью понимает.	Witnessing is the beginning of the healing process for exiles. This is an exchange where exiles get to tell their story in the presence of a compassionate, curious, calm, and connected listener and witness. When exiles are engaged with any of the eight qualities of Self-energy, the process of reparenting begins. (I’ll talk more about these qualities in Chapter 4.) The exiles get to experience an adult being there for them in a way they may never have experienced in the past. Asking exiles what they want to share about their experiences, with genuine interest, encourages them to share their pains in words, bodily sensations, emotions, movement, images, and any other way that helps them to be understood by Self. It is important for Self to respond to what the exile is sharing to deepen trust and connection between the two of them. Asking if there’s more helps the exile share their story fully. No matter what or how the exile shares, Self can handle it and support them to tell their story until they feel heard and understood. The witnessing process is complete when the exile has nothing more to share and feels fully understood by Self.
Case Vignette: An Exile’s Story	Case Vignette: An Exile’s Story	Пример из дела: история изгнанника	Case Vignette: An Exile’s Story
Kirsten is a 28-year-old Caucasian female who sought therapy for unresolved childhood trauma. She is recently engaged and concerned that if she doesn’t address her history, it will negatively impact her marriage. She grew up with married parents and two siblings significantly older than her. By the time she was eight, both siblings were away at college. She describes her parents as “unhappily married,” saying her father had multiple affairs and her mother endured his “emotional and physical abuse.” Kirsten felt like an unwanted obligation for her father and a possession to her mother instead of a desired and loved child. After working with several of Kirsten’s protectors, we received permission to connect with an exile named Unwanted.	Kirsten is a 28-year-old Caucasian female who sought therapy for unresolved childhood trauma. She is recently engaged and concerned that if she doesn’t address her history, it will negatively impact her marriage. She grew up with married parents and two siblings significantly older than her. By the time she was eight, both siblings were away at college. She describes her parents as “unhappily married,” saying her father had multiple affairs and her mother endured his “emotional and physical abuse.” Kirsten felt like an unwanted obligation for her father and a possession to her mother instead of a desired and loved child. After working with several of Kirsten’s protectors, we received permission to connect with an exile named Unwanted.	Кирстен — 28-летняя женщина европеоидной расы, обратившаяся за помощью по поводу неразрешенной детской травмы. Недавно она помолвлена ​​и обеспокоена тем, что, если она не расскажет свою историю, это негативно повлияет на ее брак. Она выросла с женатыми родителями и двумя братьями и сестрами, которые значительно старше ее. Когда ей исполнилось восемь, оба брата и сестры уже учились в колледже. Она описывает своих родителей как «несчастных в браке», говоря, что у ее отца было множество романов, а мать терпела его «эмоциональное и физическое насилие». Кирстен чувствовала себя нежеланным и любимым ребенком, а нежеланным обязательством для отца и собственностью матери. Поработав с несколькими защитниками Кирстен, мы получили разрешение связаться с изгнанником по имени Нежеланный.	Kirsten is a 28-year-old Caucasian female who sought therapy for unresolved childhood trauma. She is recently engaged and concerned that if she doesn’t address her history, it will negatively impact her marriage. She grew up with married parents and two siblings significantly older than her. By the time she was eight, both siblings were away at college. She describes her parents as “unhappily married,” saying her father had multiple affairs and her mother endured his “emotional and physical abuse.” Kirsten felt like an unwanted obligation for her father and a possession to her mother instead of a desired and loved child. After working with several of Kirsten’s protectors, we received permission to connect with an exile named Unwanted.
Kirsten felt sincere and immense compassion for Unwanted and shared her desire to get to know Unwanted’s story. This exile was slow to warm up to Kirsten because no one had shown genuine interest in her before. I instructed Kirsten to extend her compassionate energy to Unwanted until she noticed any shift in Unwanted. Kirsten was silent for a while, then said, “She has moved closer to me.” The closeness deepened Kirsten’s compassion and curiosity toward Unwanted. With the strengthened connection, I asked Kirsten if she was interested in learning Unwanted’s story. She was very interested and let Unwanted know.	Kirsten felt sincere and immense compassion for Unwanted and shared her desire to get to know Unwanted’s story. This exile was slow to warm up to Kirsten because no one had shown genuine interest in her before. I instructed Kirsten to extend her compassionate energy to Unwanted until she noticed any shift in Unwanted. Kirsten was silent for a while, then said, “She has moved closer to me.” The closeness deepened Kirsten’s compassion and curiosity toward Unwanted. With the strengthened connection, I asked Kirsten if she was interested in learning Unwanted’s story. She was very interested and let Unwanted know.	Кирстен почувствовала искреннее и огромное сострадание к Unwanted и поделилась своим желанием узнать историю Unwanted. Этот изгнанник не сразу проникся симпатией к Кирстен, потому что раньше никто не проявлял к ней искреннего интереса. Я поручил Кирстен распространять свою сострадательную энергию на «Нежелательных» до тех пор, пока она не заметит каких-либо изменений в «Нежелательных». Кирстен некоторое время молчала, а затем сказала: «Она подошла ко мне ближе». Эта близость усилила сострадание и любопытство Кирстен к Unwanted. Укрепив связь, я спросил Кирстен, интересно ли ей узнать историю Unwanted. Она была очень заинтересована и сообщила об этом Unwanted.	Kirsten felt sincere and immense compassion for Unwanted and shared her desire to get to know Unwanted’s story. This exile was slow to warm up to Kirsten because no one had shown genuine interest in her before. I instructed Kirsten to extend her compassionate energy to Unwanted until she noticed any shift in Unwanted. Kirsten was silent for a while, then said, “She has moved closer to me.” The closeness deepened Kirsten’s compassion and curiosity toward Unwanted. With the strengthened connection, I asked Kirsten if she was interested in learning Unwanted’s story. She was very interested and let Unwanted know.
Unwanted chose to tell her story in multiple scenes from her life, played like a movie. Kirsten shared what she was viewing with me, as I’ll share it with you now.	Unwanted chose to tell her story in multiple scenes from her life, played like a movie. Kirsten shared what she was viewing with me, as I’ll share it with you now.	Unwanted решила рассказать свою историю в нескольких сценах из ее жизни, разыгранных как в кино. Кирстен поделилась со мной тем, что она смотрела, а я сейчас поделюсь этим с вами.	Unwanted chose to tell her story in multiple scenes from her life, played like a movie. Kirsten shared what she was viewing with me, as I’ll share it with you now.
The first scene is of Unwanted at the dinner table with her parents. She notices her mother seems nervous and on edge as Dad starts to eat. He yells and complains that the food is horrible, shouting, “It’s a shame my girlfriend cooks better than my wife. Maybe you should take cooking lessons from her.” He throws his plate against the wall, causing Unwanted to jump in fear. Her dad threatens to leave. Her mother begs him to stay. Unwanted is scared for him to go or stay. When her father gets up from the table and starts walking to the door, her mother chases after him, crying, and tries to block the door. He yanks her away from the door, pointing at the mess he made, demanding she clean it up, then storms out and slams the door. Kirsten reports that this is a regular occurrence in her home. Dad either doesn’t come home from work; comes home, eats dinner, and leaves; or complains about what is prepared, gets angry, and leaves.	The first scene is of Unwanted at the dinner table with her parents. She notices her mother seems nervous and on edge as Dad starts to eat. He yells and complains that the food is horrible, shouting, “It’s a shame my girlfriend cooks better than my wife. Maybe you should take cooking lessons from her.” He throws his plate against the wall, causing Unwanted to jump in fear. Her dad threatens to leave. Her mother begs him to stay. Unwanted is scared for him to go or stay. When her father gets up from the table and starts walking to the door, her mother chases after him, crying, and tries to block the door. He yanks her away from the door, pointing at the mess he made, demanding she clean it up, then storms out and slams the door. Kirsten reports that this is a regular occurrence in her home. Dad either doesn’t come home from work; comes home, eats dinner, and leaves; or complains about what is prepared, gets angry, and leaves.	В первой сцене Нежелательная сидит за обеденным столом со своими родителями. Она замечает, что ее мать нервничает и нервничает, когда папа начинает есть. Он кричит и жалуется, что еда ужасная, кричит: «Жалко, что моя девушка готовит лучше, чем моя жена. Может быть, тебе стоит взять у нее уроки кулинарии. Он швыряет тарелку в стену, заставляя Нежелательного подпрыгнуть от страха. Ее отец угрожает уйти. Ее мать умоляет его остаться. Нежелательный боится, чтобы он ушел или остался. Когда ее отец встает из-за стола и идет к двери, мать, плача, гонится за ним и пытается заблокировать дверь. Он отдергивает ее от двери, показывая на устроенный им беспорядок, требуя, чтобы она все убрала, затем выбегает и хлопает дверью. Кирстен сообщает, что в ее доме это обычное явление. Папа либо не приходит с работы; приходит домой, ужинает и уходит; или жалуется на приготовленное, злится и уходит.	The first scene is of Unwanted at the dinner table with her parents. She notices her mother seems nervous and on edge as Dad starts to eat. He yells and complains that the food is horrible, shouting, “It’s a shame my girlfriend cooks better than my wife. Maybe you should take cooking lessons from her.” He throws his plate against the wall, causing Unwanted to jump in fear. Her dad threatens to leave. Her mother begs him to stay. Unwanted is scared for him to go or stay. When her father gets up from the table and starts walking to the door, her mother chases after him, crying, and tries to block the door. He yanks her away from the door, pointing at the mess he made, demanding she clean it up, then storms out and slams the door. Kirsten reports that this is a regular occurrence in her home. Dad either doesn’t come home from work; comes home, eats dinner, and leaves; or complains about what is prepared, gets angry, and leaves.
The next scene shared by Unwanted causes Kirsten’s body to shake and tremble. She is shown multiple images of her mother taking care of her in ways and at times in which she could care for herself but was not allowed. One scene is of her mother insisting on bathing her when she was 10 years old, another of her mother cutting her food and feeding it to her around the same age, and another at age 8 of her mother coming in the bathroom to help her wipe herself, saying, “I want to make sure you’re clean.” Unwanted shares, “If I insisted I could do things myself, my mother would cry and accuse me of being selfish and not loving her.”	The next scene shared by Unwanted causes Kirsten’s body to shake and tremble. She is shown multiple images of her mother taking care of her in ways and at times in which she could care for herself but was not allowed. One scene is of her mother insisting on bathing her when she was 10 years old, another of her mother cutting her food and feeding it to her around the same age, and another at age 8 of her mother coming in the bathroom to help her wipe herself, saying, “I want to make sure you’re clean.” Unwanted shares, “If I insisted I could do things myself, my mother would cry and accuse me of being selfish and not loving her.”	Следующая сцена, показанная Unwanted, заставляет тело Кирстен трястись и дрожать. Ей показывают несколько изображений ее матери, заботящейся о ней способами и в то время, когда она могла бы позаботиться о себе, но ей не разрешали. В одной сцене ее мать настаивает на купании ее, когда ей было 10 лет, в другой ее мать режет ей еду и кормит ее примерно в том же возрасте, а в другой, в 8 лет, ее мать приходит в ванную, чтобы помочь ей вытереться. сама, говоря: «Я хочу убедиться, что ты чист». Нежелательные высказывания: «Если бы я настаивал, что могу делать что-то сам, моя мать плакала бы и обвиняла бы меня в эгоизме и нелюбви к ней».	The next scene shared by Unwanted causes Kirsten’s body to shake and tremble. She is shown multiple images of her mother taking care of her in ways and at times in which she could care for herself but was not allowed. One scene is of her mother insisting on bathing her when she was 10 years old, another of her mother cutting her food and feeding it to her around the same age, and another at age 8 of her mother coming in the bathroom to help her wipe herself, saying, “I want to make sure you’re clean.” Unwanted shares, “If I insisted I could do things myself, my mother would cry and accuse me of being selfish and not loving her.”
Kirsten asks if there’s more. Unwanted continues that she felt helpless and had a hard time separating herself from her mother. At times, she felt like her body wasn’t her own but belonged to her mother.	Kirsten asks if there’s more. Unwanted continues that she felt helpless and had a hard time separating herself from her mother. At times, she felt like her body wasn’t her own but belonged to her mother.	Кирстен спрашивает, есть ли еще. Unwanted продолжает, что она чувствовала себя беспомощной и ей было трудно отделиться от матери. Временами ей казалось, что ее тело принадлежало не ей, а матери.	Kirsten asks if there’s more. Unwanted continues that she felt helpless and had a hard time separating herself from her mother. At times, she felt like her body wasn’t her own but belonged to her mother.
Unwanted describes the final scene as loud, scary, dark, and violent. She speaks directly to me instead of to Kirsten. “It started at the dinner table with my mother threatening to divorce my father if he didn’t stop cheating. My father lost it. He broke dishes, lamps, ripped pictures off the wall. He was out of control. My mother grabbed me and yelled for him to stop. That only fueled his rage, and he grabbed her, causing me to fall to the floor. I quickly crawled under the dining room table. I heard him punch her repeatedly. Her screaming made it hard for me to breathe. We were all screaming. My mother fell to the floor with my father on top of her. I saw him choking her. Her dead and desperate eyes connected with my terrified ones. Her face was bloodied. I screamed for him to stop. I was afraid he would kill her. My screaming finally got his attention. He looked down at his hands around my mother’s neck as if he was shocked to find them there. He looked back at me and then back at his hands. He released my mother and ran out of the house. I crawled into the arms of my coughing and crying mother, unsure who was comforting who.”	Unwanted describes the final scene as loud, scary, dark, and violent. She speaks directly to me instead of to Kirsten. “It started at the dinner table with my mother threatening to divorce my father if he didn’t stop cheating. My father lost it. He broke dishes, lamps, ripped pictures off the wall. He was out of control. My mother grabbed me and yelled for him to stop. That only fueled his rage, and he grabbed her, causing me to fall to the floor. I quickly crawled under the dining room table. I heard him punch her repeatedly. Her screaming made it hard for me to breathe. We were all screaming. My mother fell to the floor with my father on top of her. I saw him choking her. Her dead and desperate eyes connected with my terrified ones. Her face was bloodied. I screamed for him to stop. I was afraid he would kill her. My screaming finally got his attention. He looked down at his hands around my mother’s neck as if he was shocked to find them there. He looked back at me and then back at his hands. He released my mother and ran out of the house. I crawled into the arms of my coughing and crying mother, unsure who was comforting who.”	Unwanted описывает финальную сцену как громкую, страшную, мрачную и жестокую. Она разговаривает напрямую со мной, а не с Кирстен. «Все началось за обеденным столом, когда моя мать пригрозила развестись с моим отцом, если он не перестанет изменять. Мой отец потерял его. Он разбивал посуду, лампы, срывал со стен картины. Он вышел из-под контроля. Моя мать схватила меня и крикнула ему, чтобы он остановился. Это только усилило его ярость, и он схватил ее, заставив меня упасть на пол. Я быстро залез под обеденный стол. Я слышал, как он несколько раз ударил ее. Из-за ее крика мне было трудно дышать. Мы все кричали. Моя мать упала на пол, а отец лежал на ней. Я видела, как он душил ее. Ее мертвые и отчаянные глаза встретились с моими испуганными глазами. Ее лицо было окровавлено. Я кричал, чтобы он остановился. Я боялась, что он убьет ее. Мой крик наконец привлек его внимание. Он посмотрел на свои руки на шее моей матери, как будто был потрясен, обнаружив их там. Он снова посмотрел на меня, а затем снова на свои руки. Он отпустил мою мать и убежал из дома. Я заползла в объятия своей кашляющей и плачущей матери, не зная, кто кого утешает».	Unwanted describes the final scene as loud, scary, dark, and violent. She speaks directly to me instead of to Kirsten. “It started at the dinner table with my mother threatening to divorce my father if he didn’t stop cheating. My father lost it. He broke dishes, lamps, ripped pictures off the wall. He was out of control. My mother grabbed me and yelled for him to stop. That only fueled his rage, and he grabbed her, causing me to fall to the floor. I quickly crawled under the dining room table. I heard him punch her repeatedly. Her screaming made it hard for me to breathe. We were all screaming. My mother fell to the floor with my father on top of her. I saw him choking her. Her dead and desperate eyes connected with my terrified ones. Her face was bloodied. I screamed for him to stop. I was afraid he would kill her. My screaming finally got his attention. He looked down at his hands around my mother’s neck as if he was shocked to find them there. He looked back at me and then back at his hands. He released my mother and ran out of the house. I crawled into the arms of my coughing and crying mother, unsure who was comforting who.”
I ask Kirsten to ask Unwanted if there is anything else she wants to share. Unwanted shares that she saw her mother get beaten many times, but this was the worst and scariest because she thought her mother was going to die. I ask Kirsten to check and see if Unwanted feels understood and heard by her. Kirsten nods and tells me what Unwanted has said: “Finally, someone understands what happened to me.”	I ask Kirsten to ask Unwanted if there is anything else she wants to share. Unwanted shares that she saw her mother get beaten many times, but this was the worst and scariest because she thought her mother was going to die. I ask Kirsten to check and see if Unwanted feels understood and heard by her. Kirsten nods and tells me what Unwanted has said: “Finally, someone understands what happened to me.”	Я прошу Кирстен спросить Unwanted, есть ли еще что-нибудь, чем она хочет поделиться. Нежелательная рассказывает, что она много раз видела, как ее мать избивали, но это было самое худшее и страшное, потому что она думала, что ее мать умрет. Я прошу Кирстен проверить, чувствует ли она, что Unwanted понята и услышана. Кирстен кивает и рассказывает мне то, что сказал Unwanted: «Наконец-то кто-то понял, что со мной случилось».	I ask Kirsten to ask Unwanted if there is anything else she wants to share. Unwanted shares that she saw her mother get beaten many times, but this was the worst and scariest because she thought her mother was going to die. I ask Kirsten to check and see if Unwanted feels understood and heard by her. Kirsten nods and tells me what Unwanted has said: “Finally, someone understands what happened to me.”
The entire time Kirsten was sharing the last scene, she and Unwanted were both in the seat of consciousness. Sometimes the client will witness the exile’s story by being with the part, and other times the client will be the part. When the client is the part, the exile is speaking directly to the therapist, sharing its story and connecting with the therapist. This back and forth between being with and being the part can occur multiple times within the witnessing of one memory. I find this endearing when it happens because it feels like the part is trusting me as the therapist and wants to share their story more intimately with me.	The entire time Kirsten was sharing the last scene, she and Unwanted were both in the seat of consciousness. Sometimes the client will witness the exile’s story by being with the part, and other times the client will be the part. When the client is the part, the exile is speaking directly to the therapist, sharing its story and connecting with the therapist. This back and forth between being with and being the part can occur multiple times within the witnessing of one memory. I find this endearing when it happens because it feels like the part is trusting me as the therapist and wants to share their story more intimately with me.	Все время, пока Кирстен рассказывала последнюю сцену, она и Unwanted оба находились в сознании. Иногда клиент становится свидетелем истории изгнанника, будучи частью роли, а иногда клиент сам становится частью. Когда клиент является частью, изгнанник разговаривает напрямую с терапевтом, делится своей историей и соединяется с терапевтом. Это взад и вперед между бытием и ролью может происходить несколько раз в течение свидетельствования одного воспоминания. Я нахожу это милым, когда это происходит, потому что такое чувство, будто часть доверяет мне как терапевту и хочет более подробно поделиться со мной своей историей.	The entire time Kirsten was sharing the last scene, she and Unwanted were both in the seat of consciousness. Sometimes the client will witness the exile’s story by being with the part, and other times the client will be the part. When the client is the part, the exile is speaking directly to the therapist, sharing its story and connecting with the therapist. This back and forth between being with and being the part can occur multiple times within the witnessing of one memory. I find this endearing when it happens because it feels like the part is trusting me as the therapist and wants to share their story more intimately with me.
Meditation: The Meadow	Meditation: The Meadow	Медитация: Луг	Meditation: The Meadow
The Meadow meditation is the third given to me by my ancestors. While doing my own IFS therapy and working with my exiles, my ancestors allowed me to connect more fully with one of my exiles through this meditation.	The Meadow meditation is the third given to me by my ancestors. While doing my own IFS therapy and working with my exiles, my ancestors allowed me to connect more fully with one of my exiles through this meditation.	Медитация «Луг» — третья, данная мне моими предками. Когда я проходил IFS-терапию и работал со своими изгнанниками, мои предки позволили мне более полно соединиться с одним из моих изгнанников посредством этой медитации.	The Meadow meditation is the third given to me by my ancestors. While doing my own IFS therapy and working with my exiles, my ancestors allowed me to connect more fully with one of my exiles through this meditation.
This meditation allows you to meet and get to know a new exile or deepen a connection with one you’ve met before.	This meditation allows you to meet and get to know a new exile or deepen a connection with one you’ve met before.	Эта медитация позволяет вам встретиться и узнать нового изгнанника или углубить связь с тем, кого вы встречали раньше.	This meditation allows you to meet and get to know a new exile or deepen a connection with one you’ve met before.
Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Закройте глаза или смягчите взгляд.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.
Adjust your body until it settles.	Adjust your body until it settles.	Регулируйте свое тело, пока оно не успокоится.	Adjust your body until it settles.
Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.	Перенесите свое осознание на свое дыхание и просто дышите.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.
As you go inside, notice the pause at the end of each inhale and exhale. Right before the next inhale or exhale, there’s a space. Pause at that space.	As you go inside, notice the pause at the end of each inhale and exhale. Right before the next inhale or exhale, there’s a space. Pause at that space.	Заходя внутрь, обратите внимание на паузу в конце каждого вдоха и выдоха. Прямо перед следующим вдохом или выдохом есть пространство. Сделайте паузу в этом месте.	As you go inside, notice the pause at the end of each inhale and exhale. Right before the next inhale or exhale, there’s a space. Pause at that space.
Follow your breath through your body several times, noticing the pause.	Follow your breath through your body several times, noticing the pause.	Несколько раз проследите за дыханием по всему телу, замечая паузу.	Follow your breath through your body several times, noticing the pause.
Find yourself in a sunlit meadow with all the scents of spring in the air.	Find yourself in a sunlit meadow with all the scents of spring in the air.	Окажитесь на залитой солнцем поляне, в воздухе витают ароматы весны.	Find yourself in a sunlit meadow with all the scents of spring in the air.
The tall grass waves in the wind.	The tall grass waves in the wind.	Высокая трава колышется на ветру.	The tall grass waves in the wind.
The sun is warm on your face.	The sun is warm on your face.	Солнце греет твое лицо.	The sun is warm on your face.
And you notice a cool breeze.	And you notice a cool breeze.	И вы замечаете прохладный ветерок.	And you notice a cool breeze.
Walking in the warmth, you see a small child sitting on a patch of grass with their back to you.	Walking in the warmth, you see a small child sitting on a patch of grass with their back to you.	Прогуливаясь по теплу, вы видите маленького ребенка, сидящего на травке спиной к вам.	Walking in the warmth, you see a small child sitting on a patch of grass with their back to you.
As you walk closer, you recognize the child as a younger you.	As you walk closer, you recognize the child as a younger you.	Подойдя ближе, вы узнаете в ребенке себя младше.	As you walk closer, you recognize the child as a younger you.
You sense the child’s emotions and get as close as the child will allow.	You sense the child’s emotions and get as close as the child will allow.	Вы чувствуете эмоции ребенка и подходите настолько близко, насколько ребенок позволяет.	You sense the child’s emotions and get as close as the child will allow.
What do you notice about the younger you?	What do you notice about the younger you?	Что вы замечаете в молодости?	What do you notice about the younger you?
How do you feel toward them?	How do you feel toward them?	Как вы к ним относитесь?	How do you feel toward them?
If those feelings are open and/or positive, send the energy of those feelings to your younger self.	If those feelings are open and/or positive, send the energy of those feelings to your younger self.	Если эти чувства открыты и/или позитивны, пошлите энергию этих чувств своему молодому «я».	If those feelings are open and/or positive, send the energy of those feelings to your younger self.
If the feelings are not warm or positive, see if the parts with those feelings will step back and allow you to be with your younger self. If they will not step back, explore their concerns and/or fears.	If the feelings are not warm or positive, see if the parts with those feelings will step back and allow you to be with your younger self. If they will not step back, explore their concerns and/or fears.	Если чувства не теплые и не позитивные, посмотрите, отойдут ли части с этими чувствами и позволят ли вам побыть с самим собой в молодости. Если они не отступят, изучите их опасения и/или страхи.	If the feelings are not warm or positive, see if the parts with those feelings will step back and allow you to be with your younger self. If they will not step back, explore their concerns and/or fears.
As you send your younger self the positive energy, see if they will allow you to come closer.	As you send your younger self the positive energy, see if they will allow you to come closer.	Посылая себе положительную энергию, посмотрите, позволят ли они вам подойти ближе.	As you send your younger self the positive energy, see if they will allow you to come closer.
Be with your younger self in whatever way they need you to be there.	Be with your younger self in whatever way they need you to be there.	Будьте со своим младшим «я» так, как им нужно, чтобы вы были рядом.	Be with your younger self in whatever way they need you to be there.
If they want to talk, listen.	If they want to talk, listen.	Если они хотят поговорить, послушайте.	If they want to talk, listen.
If they want to be held, hold them.	If they want to be held, hold them.	Если они хотят, чтобы их держали, держите их.	If they want to be held, hold them.
If they want to play, play with them, or watch them play.	If they want to play, play with them, or watch them play.	Если они хотят играть, играйте с ними или смотрите, как они играют.	If they want to play, play with them, or watch them play.
Whatever they need, be there for them.	Whatever they need, be there for them.	Независимо от того, что им нужно, будьте рядом с ними.	Whatever they need, be there for them.
Ask your younger self if there’s more they need from you.	Ask your younger self if there’s more they need from you.	Спросите себя, молодого, нужно ли им от вас еще что-то.	Ask your younger self if there’s more they need from you.
Continue your time in the meadow together in whatever way your younger self needs.	Continue your time in the meadow together in whatever way your younger self needs.	Продолжайте проводить время вместе на лугу так, как нужно вашему младшему.	Continue your time in the meadow together in whatever way your younger self needs.
Now that you’re connected, let your younger self know they always have you.	Now that you’re connected, let your younger self know they always have you.	Теперь, когда вы на связи, дайте знать своему молодому «я», что вы всегда рядом.	Now that you’re connected, let your younger self know they always have you.
See if there’s anything more either of you want to share with the other before it’s time to go.	See if there’s anything more either of you want to share with the other before it’s time to go.	Посмотрите, есть ли что-нибудь еще, чем вы хотите поделиться с другим, прежде чем придет время идти.	See if there’s anything more either of you want to share with the other before it’s time to go.
See if there’s a place your younger self would like to stay until the two of you connect again. If so, take your younger self to that place.	See if there’s a place your younger self would like to stay until the two of you connect again. If so, take your younger self to that place.	Посмотрите, есть ли место, где вы, молодой человек, хотели бы остаться, пока вы двое снова не встретитесь. Если да, отведите себя в молодости в это место.	See if there’s a place your younger self would like to stay until the two of you connect again. If so, take your younger self to that place.
Let your younger self know it is time for you to leave, and reassure them that you will connect with them again.	Let your younger self know it is time for you to leave, and reassure them that you will connect with them again.	Дайте своему молодому «я» понять, что вам пора уйти, и заверьте его, что вы снова с ним соединитесь.	Let your younger self know it is time for you to leave, and reassure them that you will connect with them again.
Bring your awareness to your breath and the space between each inhale and exhale. When you’re ready, re-enter this moment and space by slowly opening your eyes.	Bring your awareness to your breath and the space between each inhale and exhale. When you’re ready, re-enter this moment and space by slowly opening your eyes.	Направьте свое внимание на свое дыхание и пространство между каждым вдохом и выдохом. Когда вы будете готовы, вернитесь в этот момент и пространство, медленно открывая глаза.	Bring your awareness to your breath and the space between each inhale and exhale. When you’re ready, re-enter this moment and space by slowly opening your eyes.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.	Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.	Достаньте свой дневник и быстро запишите все, что вы хотели бы уловить из этой медитации. Это может быть откровение, размышление, мимолетная мысль или чувственное восприятие.	Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.
Exercise 2: The Meadow Journal Questions	Exercise 2: The Meadow Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Вопросы для журнала Meadow	Exercise 2: The Meadow Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Meadow meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Meadow meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили Медоу-медитацию и написали быстрый дневник, потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, ответив на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Meadow meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
What are the first things you noticed about your younger self?	What are the first things you noticed about your younger self?	Что вы в первую очередь заметили в себе в молодости?	What are the first things you noticed about your younger self?
What emotions did you sense from the younger you when you first came upon them?	What emotions did you sense from the younger you when you first came upon them?	Какие эмоции вы почувствовали у младших, когда впервые столкнулись с ними?	What emotions did you sense from the younger you when you first came upon them?
Were you already familiar with this part of yourself? If so, how has this part expressed itself in the past?	Were you already familiar with this part of yourself? If so, how has this part expressed itself in the past?	Вы уже были знакомы с этой частью себя? Если да, то как эта часть выражала себя в прошлом?	Were you already familiar with this part of yourself? If so, how has this part expressed itself in the past?
How did you feel toward the part? If it was positive or warm, how did the part respond?	How did you feel toward the part? If it was positive or warm, how did the part respond?	Как вы относились к этой роли? Если оно было положительным или теплым, как отреагировала часть?	How did you feel toward the part? If it was positive or warm, how did the part respond?
If it was not positive or warm, what parts came up and what were their fears or concerns?	If it was not positive or warm, what parts came up and what were their fears or concerns?	Если оно не было позитивным или теплым, какие части возникали и каковы были их страхи или опасения?	If it was not positive or warm, what parts came up and what were their fears or concerns?
What did your younger self need from you?	What did your younger self need from you?	Что нужно было от тебя твоему молодому «я»?	What did your younger self need from you?
What is the significance of this part showing up today?	What is the significance of this part showing up today?	Каково значение этой части, появившейся сегодня?	What is the significance of this part showing up today?
Exercise 3: Deepen the Connection	Exercise 3: Deepen the Connection	Упражнение 3. Углубляйте связь	Exercise 3: Deepen the Connection
Connect with this part daily for a week to learn more about them.	Connect with this part daily for a week to learn more about them.	Подключайтесь к этой части ежедневно в течение недели, чтобы узнать о них больше.	Connect with this part daily for a week to learn more about them.
Ask the part what more it wants to share with you.	Ask the part what more it wants to share with you.	Спросите часть, чем еще она хочет с вами поделиться.	Ask the part what more it wants to share with you.
Ask the part what has been difficult for it.	Ask the part what has been difficult for it.	Спросите часть, что для нее было трудным.	Ask the part what has been difficult for it.
What did it need that it didn’t get?	What did it need that it didn’t get?	Что ему нужно, чего он не получил?	What did it need that it didn’t get?
Journal what you learn.	Journal what you learn.	Записывайте то, что вы изучаете.	Journal what you learn.
CHAPTER 4	CHAPTER 4	ГЛАВА 4	CHAPTER 4
Self Qualities	Self Qualities	Личностные качества	Self Qualities
The You That’s Not a Part	The You That’s Not a Part	Ты, это не часть	The You That’s Not a Part
I sit in a translucent golden bubble. I am safe. I am present. I am open. I not only hear their words, but I feel them. I am leading an IFS training where some participants expected an affinity space for BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, People of Color) attendees, while others anticipated an affinity space for Black folks only. However, the training is designed to include predominantly people who identify as Black, followed by a smaller number of people who identify as BIPOC, and then a lesser number of participants who identify as white. Because most of the attendees did not expect the training to include white people, their parts feel unsafe, disappointed, fearful, angry, defensive, and harmed.	I sit in a translucent golden bubble. I am safe. I am present. I am open. I not only hear their words, but I feel them. I am leading an IFS training where some participants expected an affinity space for BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, People of Color) attendees, while others anticipated an affinity space for Black folks only. However, the training is designed to include predominantly people who identify as Black, followed by a smaller number of people who identify as BIPOC, and then a lesser number of participants who identify as white. Because most of the attendees did not expect the training to include white people, their parts feel unsafe, disappointed, fearful, angry, defensive, and harmed.	Я сижу в полупрозрачном золотом пузыре. Я в безопасности. Я присутствую. Я открыт. Я не только слышу их слова, но и чувствую их. Я провожу тренинг IFS, где некоторые участники ожидали, что пространство близости будет предназначено для участников BIPOC (чернокожие, коренные жители, цветные люди), в то время как другие ожидали, что пространство близости будет только для чернокожих людей. Тем не менее, обучение рассчитано преимущественно на людей, идентифицирующих себя как чернокожие, за которыми следует меньшее количество людей, идентифицирующих себя как BIPOC, а затем меньшее количество участников, идентифицирующих себя как белые. Поскольку большинство участников не ожидали, что в тренинге примут участие белые люди, их части чувствуют себя небезопасно, разочарованы, напуганы, злы, защищаются и обижены.	I sit in a translucent golden bubble. I am safe. I am present. I am open. I not only hear their words, but I feel them. I am leading an IFS training where some participants expected an affinity space for BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, People of Color) attendees, while others anticipated an affinity space for Black folks only. However, the training is designed to include predominantly people who identify as Black, followed by a smaller number of people who identify as BIPOC, and then a lesser number of participants who identify as white. Because most of the attendees did not expect the training to include white people, their parts feel unsafe, disappointed, fearful, angry, defensive, and harmed.
IFS training sessions are designed to use the model to address any conflict or difficulties that arise in the training. Therefore, processing time is built into the design of the training. However, this training required more processing than any other that I have led because so many people were activated so intensely. Every day of the training required some amount of processing related to the racial and ethnic makeup of the training cohort. As the lead trainer and the most visible, I was the target of the participants’ anger, rage, and blame. I realized from this experience there are situations that no amount of training and mentoring can prepare you for. What did prepare me to remain in my seat, without my parts taking over, was my commitment to my own IFS therapy that I had been doing for five years before this training.	IFS training sessions are designed to use the model to address any conflict or difficulties that arise in the training. Therefore, processing time is built into the design of the training. However, this training required more processing than any other that I have led because so many people were activated so intensely. Every day of the training required some amount of processing related to the racial and ethnic makeup of the training cohort. As the lead trainer and the most visible, I was the target of the participants’ anger, rage, and blame. I realized from this experience there are situations that no amount of training and mentoring can prepare you for. What did prepare me to remain in my seat, without my parts taking over, was my commitment to my own IFS therapy that I had been doing for five years before this training.	Тренинги IFS предназначены для использования модели для разрешения любых конфликтов или трудностей, возникающих в ходе обучения. Таким образом, время обработки заложено в структуру обучения. Однако это обучение потребовало больше обработки, чем любое другое, которое я проводил, потому что очень много людей было активировано очень интенсивно. Каждый день обучения требовал некоторой обработки, связанной с расовым и этническим составом обучающейся когорты. Как ведущий тренер и самый заметный человек, я стал объектом гнева, ярости и обвинений участников. Из этого опыта я понял, что существуют ситуации, к которым вас не подготовит никакое обучение и наставничество. Что действительно подготовило меня к тому, чтобы оставаться на своем месте, без того, чтобы мои части взяли на себя управление, так это моя приверженность моей собственной терапии IFS, которую я проходил в течение пяти лет до этого тренинга.	IFS training sessions are designed to use the model to address any conflict or difficulties that arise in the training. Therefore, processing time is built into the design of the training. However, this training required more processing than any other that I have led because so many people were activated so intensely. Every day of the training required some amount of processing related to the racial and ethnic makeup of the training cohort. As the lead trainer and the most visible, I was the target of the participants’ anger, rage, and blame. I realized from this experience there are situations that no amount of training and mentoring can prepare you for. What did prepare me to remain in my seat, without my parts taking over, was my commitment to my own IFS therapy that I had been doing for five years before this training.
In the most heated exchange and processing, I heard the following accusations from participants: “Leadership tricked us. We were led to believe this was going to be a safe place; I don’t feel safe. I didn’t expect to see white people in a training for BIPOC folks. Leadership has heard our complaints and hasn’t done anything to fix the problem. It doesn’t seem like leadership cares. We are being harmed in this training, and leadership isn’t doing anything about it.” Over and over, I heard, “I don’t feel safe, I’m being harmed, leadership doesn’t care enough to do anything to take care of me, and my needs are not important.”	In the most heated exchange and processing, I heard the following accusations from participants: “Leadership tricked us. We were led to believe this was going to be a safe place; I don’t feel safe. I didn’t expect to see white people in a training for BIPOC folks. Leadership has heard our complaints and hasn’t done anything to fix the problem. It doesn’t seem like leadership cares. We are being harmed in this training, and leadership isn’t doing anything about it.” Over and over, I heard, “I don’t feel safe, I’m being harmed, leadership doesn’t care enough to do anything to take care of me, and my needs are not important.”	В ходе самого горячего обмена мнениями и обработкой я услышал от участников следующие обвинения: «Лидерство нас обмануло. Нас заставили поверить, что это будет безопасное место; Я не чувствую себя в безопасности. Я не ожидал увидеть белых людей на тренинге для ребят из BIPOC. Руководство услышало наши жалобы и не предприняло ничего, чтобы решить проблему. Похоже, руководство это не волнует. Нам наносят вред во время этого обучения, и руководство ничего с этим не делает». Снова и снова я слышал: «Я не чувствую себя в безопасности, мне причиняют вред, руководство не заботится настолько, чтобы позаботиться обо мне, а мои потребности не важны».	In the most heated exchange and processing, I heard the following accusations from participants: “Leadership tricked us. We were led to believe this was going to be a safe place; I don’t feel safe. I didn’t expect to see white people in a training for BIPOC folks. Leadership has heard our complaints and hasn’t done anything to fix the problem. It doesn’t seem like leadership cares. We are being harmed in this training, and leadership isn’t doing anything about it.” Over and over, I heard, “I don’t feel safe, I’m being harmed, leadership doesn’t care enough to do anything to take care of me, and my needs are not important.”
Prior to learning about my system of parts and being in relationship with them, I would have become defensive and frustrated, justifying why things were the way they were, and attempting to explain my way out of a difficult situation. Instead, my parts did not take over. They trusted me. As I sat in my golden bubble, I envisioned each blaming statement as a fiery arrow leaving the hand of the one talking being shot toward me. As each flaming arrow got closer, it transformed into the pain under their words of blame and finger pointing. I saw the depth of their hurt, disappointment, fear, lack of safety, and unworthiness of their needs being met. I did not experience their words as a personal attack as I would have in my past. I experienced their words as requests for what they needed and I met them with compassion, calm, and curiosity. I genuinely wanted to understand what the participants were feeling and experiencing.	Prior to learning about my system of parts and being in relationship with them, I would have become defensive and frustrated, justifying why things were the way they were, and attempting to explain my way out of a difficult situation. Instead, my parts did not take over. They trusted me. As I sat in my golden bubble, I envisioned each blaming statement as a fiery arrow leaving the hand of the one talking being shot toward me. As each flaming arrow got closer, it transformed into the pain under their words of blame and finger pointing. I saw the depth of their hurt, disappointment, fear, lack of safety, and unworthiness of their needs being met. I did not experience their words as a personal attack as I would have in my past. I experienced their words as requests for what they needed and I met them with compassion, calm, and curiosity. I genuinely wanted to understand what the participants were feeling and experiencing.	До того, как я узнал о своей системе частей и вступил в отношения с ними, я бы занял оборонительную позицию и расстроился, оправдывая, почему все обстоит именно так, и пытаясь объяснить свой выход из трудной ситуации. Вместо этого мои части не взяли верх. Они доверяли мне. Сидя в своем золотом пузыре, я представлял себе каждое обвиняющее высказывание как огненную стрелу, покидающую руку говорящего и летящую в мою сторону. По мере того, как каждая пылающая стрела приближалась, она превращалась в боль от слов обвинения и тыканья пальцем. Я видел глубину их боли, разочарования, страха, отсутствия безопасности и недостойности удовлетворения их потребностей. Я не воспринял их слова как личную атаку, как это было в прошлом. Я воспринял их слова как просьбы о том, что им нужно, и встретил их с состраданием, спокойствием и любопытством. Мне искренне хотелось понять, что чувствовали и переживали участники.	Prior to learning about my system of parts and being in relationship with them, I would have become defensive and frustrated, justifying why things were the way they were, and attempting to explain my way out of a difficult situation. Instead, my parts did not take over. They trusted me. As I sat in my golden bubble, I envisioned each blaming statement as a fiery arrow leaving the hand of the one talking being shot toward me. As each flaming arrow got closer, it transformed into the pain under their words of blame and finger pointing. I saw the depth of their hurt, disappointment, fear, lack of safety, and unworthiness of their needs being met. I did not experience their words as a personal attack as I would have in my past. I experienced their words as requests for what they needed and I met them with compassion, calm, and curiosity. I genuinely wanted to understand what the participants were feeling and experiencing.
I also wanted to help ease their pain. Therefore, I not only listened, but I also encouraged them to tell me more. I didn’t shy away from the conversation I would have found quite difficult in the past. I delved deeper to understand more fully. I didn’t only listen with compassion and curiosity; I extended my Self-energy toward them. I let them experience that I could hold whatever the truth of their feelings was. To help them to trust me more, I took complete responsibility for what had happened—for the lack of clarity about the racial composition of the training. I expressed my understanding of how shocking and disappointing this must be for them. I assumed nothing. I asked them to share with me the injuries they experienced and what they needed from me as a repair. I persisted in my commitment to help them feel seen, heard, and understood by me.	I also wanted to help ease their pain. Therefore, I not only listened, but I also encouraged them to tell me more. I didn’t shy away from the conversation I would have found quite difficult in the past. I delved deeper to understand more fully. I didn’t only listen with compassion and curiosity; I extended my Self-energy toward them. I let them experience that I could hold whatever the truth of their feelings was. To help them to trust me more, I took complete responsibility for what had happened—for the lack of clarity about the racial composition of the training. I expressed my understanding of how shocking and disappointing this must be for them. I assumed nothing. I asked them to share with me the injuries they experienced and what they needed from me as a repair. I persisted in my commitment to help them feel seen, heard, and understood by me.	Я также хотел помочь облегчить их боль. Поэтому я не только слушал, но и побуждал их рассказать мне больше. Я не уклонялся от разговора, который раньше показался мне довольно трудным. Я копнул глубже, чтобы понять более полно. Я слушал не только с состраданием и любопытством; Я направил на них свою энергию Я. Я позволил им почувствовать, что могу выдержать истину их чувств. Чтобы помочь им больше доверять мне, я взял на себя полную ответственность за произошедшее — за отсутствие ясности относительно расового состава обучающихся. Я выразил свое понимание того, насколько это должно быть для них шокирующим и разочаровывающим. Я ничего не предполагал. Я попросил их рассказать мне о травмах, которые они получили, и о том, что им нужно от меня в качестве ремонта. Я настаивал на своем стремлении помочь им почувствовать, что я их вижу, слышу и понимаю.	I also wanted to help ease their pain. Therefore, I not only listened, but I also encouraged them to tell me more. I didn’t shy away from the conversation I would have found quite difficult in the past. I delved deeper to understand more fully. I didn’t only listen with compassion and curiosity; I extended my Self-energy toward them. I let them experience that I could hold whatever the truth of their feelings was. To help them to trust me more, I took complete responsibility for what had happened—for the lack of clarity about the racial composition of the training. I expressed my understanding of how shocking and disappointing this must be for them. I assumed nothing. I asked them to share with me the injuries they experienced and what they needed from me as a repair. I persisted in my commitment to help them feel seen, heard, and understood by me.
This experience taught me that Self-energy can hold big emotions. It can hold the pain of others. It can be the connection between the expression of hurt and the relief of that hurt with understanding. I learned that I am not harmed by the expression of someone else’s pain, even when that expression is directed at me. I also had an awareness that I was not efforting or searching for the “right” words to say. I wasn’t trying to placate, people-please or caretake the participants. Accessing my Self qualities allowed me to be with what was present in the room with the confidence of a compassionate listener connecting with the pain of those sharing. I remained curious to know their experiences as fully as they were willing to share. I had the courage to ask for clarity to deepen my understanding, and keeping a calm head made space for creative offerings to improve the situation. Through the entire process, the confidence of Self maintained that I could handle their concerns, repair the unintended impact, and not be diminished by their upset.	This experience taught me that Self-energy can hold big emotions. It can hold the pain of others. It can be the connection between the expression of hurt and the relief of that hurt with understanding. I learned that I am not harmed by the expression of someone else’s pain, even when that expression is directed at me. I also had an awareness that I was not efforting or searching for the “right” words to say. I wasn’t trying to placate, people-please or caretake the participants. Accessing my Self qualities allowed me to be with what was present in the room with the confidence of a compassionate listener connecting with the pain of those sharing. I remained curious to know their experiences as fully as they were willing to share. I had the courage to ask for clarity to deepen my understanding, and keeping a calm head made space for creative offerings to improve the situation. Through the entire process, the confidence of Self maintained that I could handle their concerns, repair the unintended impact, and not be diminished by their upset.	Этот опыт научил меня тому, что собственная энергия может удерживать сильные эмоции. Оно может удерживать боль других. Это может быть связь между выражением боли и облегчением этой боли пониманием. Я узнал, что выражение чужой боли не причиняет мне вреда, даже если это выражение направлено на меня. Я также осознавал, что не пытаюсь и не ищу «правильные» слова, чтобы сказать. Я не пытался успокоить, порадовать или позаботиться об участниках. Доступ к своим качествам Я позволил мне быть с тем, что присутствовало в комнате, с уверенностью сострадательного слушателя, соприкасающегося с болью тех, кто разделял это. Мне по-прежнему было любопытно узнать об их опыте настолько полно, насколько они были готовы поделиться. У меня хватило смелости попросить ясности, чтобы углубить мое понимание, и, сохраняя спокойствие, освободилось место для творческих предложений по улучшению ситуации. На протяжении всего процесса уверенность «Я» сохранялась в том, что я смогу справиться с их проблемами, исправить непреднамеренное воздействие и не ослабить их расстройство.	This experience taught me that Self-energy can hold big emotions. It can hold the pain of others. It can be the connection between the expression of hurt and the relief of that hurt with understanding. I learned that I am not harmed by the expression of someone else’s pain, even when that expression is directed at me. I also had an awareness that I was not efforting or searching for the “right” words to say. I wasn’t trying to placate, people-please or caretake the participants. Accessing my Self qualities allowed me to be with what was present in the room with the confidence of a compassionate listener connecting with the pain of those sharing. I remained curious to know their experiences as fully as they were willing to share. I had the courage to ask for clarity to deepen my understanding, and keeping a calm head made space for creative offerings to improve the situation. Through the entire process, the confidence of Self maintained that I could handle their concerns, repair the unintended impact, and not be diminished by their upset.
IFS CONCEPT 1: SELF QUALITIES	IFS CONCEPT 1: SELF QUALITIES	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: СОБСТВЕННЫЕ КАЧЕСТВА	IFS CONCEPT 1: SELF QUALITIES
Self is universal, and everyone has access to Self. It is who we are when we are not blended with one of our extreme parts. Self is whole and unaffected by the hurts and traumas we have experienced. This is the deepest essence or center of every person. Self is wise, intuitive, and able to heal and lead. The only agenda held by Self is one of healing detached from controlling how and when healing takes place. Self never goes away. However, we may lose connection to Self because of the harshness, abuses, and attachment injuries we’ve experienced. An analogy to describe what happens when we have little or no access to Self is the same as when clouds obscure the sun on an overcast day. The sun does not go away. It is still present but covered by the clouds. No matter how dampened or covered up Self may become, it is still present. The key is to bring awareness to our parts and develop a relationship between Self and our parts.	Self is universal, and everyone has access to Self. It is who we are when we are not blended with one of our extreme parts. Self is whole and unaffected by the hurts and traumas we have experienced. This is the deepest essence or center of every person. Self is wise, intuitive, and able to heal and lead. The only agenda held by Self is one of healing detached from controlling how and when healing takes place. Self never goes away. However, we may lose connection to Self because of the harshness, abuses, and attachment injuries we’ve experienced. An analogy to describe what happens when we have little or no access to Self is the same as when clouds obscure the sun on an overcast day. The sun does not go away. It is still present but covered by the clouds. No matter how dampened or covered up Self may become, it is still present. The key is to bring awareness to our parts and develop a relationship between Self and our parts.	«Я» универсально, и каждый имеет доступ к «Я». Это то, кем мы являемся, когда мы не смешаны с одной из наших крайних частей. «Я» целостно и не затронуто обидами и травмами, которые мы пережили. Это глубочайшая сущность или центр каждого человека. «Я» мудро, интуитивно понятно и способно исцелять и вести. Единственная программа, которой придерживается «Я», — это исцеление, отделенное от контроля над тем, как и когда происходит исцеление. Я никогда не уходит. Однако мы можем потерять связь с «Я» из-за жестокости, оскорблений и травм привязанности, которые мы пережили. Аналогия для описания того, что происходит, когда у нас мало или вообще нет доступа к Самости, такая же, как когда облака закрывают солнце в пасмурный день. Солнце не уходит. Он все еще существует, но скрыт облаками. Независимо от того, насколько приглушенным или скрытым может стать «Я», оно все равно присутствует. Ключевым моментом является привлечение внимания к нашим частям и развитие отношений между «Я» и нашими частями.	Self is universal, and everyone has access to Self. It is who we are when we are not blended with one of our extreme parts. Self is whole and unaffected by the hurts and traumas we have experienced. This is the deepest essence or center of every person. Self is wise, intuitive, and able to heal and lead. The only agenda held by Self is one of healing detached from controlling how and when healing takes place. Self never goes away. However, we may lose connection to Self because of the harshness, abuses, and attachment injuries we’ve experienced. An analogy to describe what happens when we have little or no access to Self is the same as when clouds obscure the sun on an overcast day. The sun does not go away. It is still present but covered by the clouds. No matter how dampened or covered up Self may become, it is still present. The key is to bring awareness to our parts and develop a relationship between Self and our parts.
Self has eight essential qualities, as we saw in Chapter 1—the eight Cs. When Self is expressed, we experience one or more of these qualities. The qualities are compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, confidence, clarity, creativity, and courage. The qualities are defined by Dr. Richard Schwartz1 and Julia Sullivan,2 a Level 2–trained IFS therapist, as follows:	Self has eight essential qualities, as we saw in Chapter 1—the eight Cs. When Self is expressed, we experience one or more of these qualities. The qualities are compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, confidence, clarity, creativity, and courage. The qualities are defined by Dr. Richard Schwartz1 and Julia Sullivan,2 a Level 2–trained IFS therapist, as follows:	Как мы видели в главе 1, «Я» обладает восемью основными качествами — восемью «С». Когда выражается «Я», мы испытываем одно или несколько из этих качеств. Качества: сострадание, любопытство, спокойствие, связность, уверенность, ясность, творчество и смелость. Эти качества определены доктором Ричардом Шварцем1 и Джулией Салливан2, терапевтом IFS 2-го уровня, следующим образом:	Self has eight essential qualities, as we saw in Chapter 1—the eight Cs. When Self is expressed, we experience one or more of these qualities. The qualities are compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, confidence, clarity, creativity, and courage. The qualities are defined by Dr. Richard Schwartz1 and Julia Sullivan,2 a Level 2–trained IFS therapist, as follows:
Compassion: The ability to see suffering and feel for another. It is different from empathy, which is feeling with another. When we have compassion for others, we want to do something to relieve their suffering. We simultaneously have empathy for the other and a belief that the other has a Self that can relieve the other’s own suffering. Compassion allows us to see beyond others’ angry parts to the fear or pain behind them. We can apply these concepts of compassion to our own parts as well in the form of self-compassion. Self offers compassion to our parts when they are attempting to deal with challenging life situations. Parts need to know through the experience of Self that they are not alone and have a resource to support and guide them.	Compassion: The ability to see suffering and feel for another. It is different from empathy, which is feeling with another. When we have compassion for others, we want to do something to relieve their suffering. We simultaneously have empathy for the other and a belief that the other has a Self that can relieve the other’s own suffering. Compassion allows us to see beyond others’ angry parts to the fear or pain behind them. We can apply these concepts of compassion to our own parts as well in the form of self-compassion. Self offers compassion to our parts when they are attempting to deal with challenging life situations. Parts need to know through the experience of Self that they are not alone and have a resource to support and guide them.	Сострадание: способность видеть страдания и сочувствовать другому. Это отличается от эмпатии, которая проявляется в отношениях с другим человеком. Когда мы сострадаем другим, мы хотим сделать что-то, чтобы облегчить их страдания. У нас одновременно есть сочувствие к другому и вера в то, что у другого есть «Я», способное облегчить страдания другого. Сострадание позволяет нам видеть за пределами гнева других людей страх или боль, стоящие за ними. Мы можем применить эти концепции сострадания к своим частям тела, а также в форме самосострадания. «Я» проявляет сострадание к нашим частям, когда они пытаются справиться со сложными жизненными ситуациями. Части должны знать через опыт Самости, что они не одиноки и что у них есть ресурс, который сможет поддержать и направить их.	Compassion: The ability to see suffering and feel for another. It is different from empathy, which is feeling with another. When we have compassion for others, we want to do something to relieve their suffering. We simultaneously have empathy for the other and a belief that the other has a Self that can relieve the other’s own suffering. Compassion allows us to see beyond others’ angry parts to the fear or pain behind them. We can apply these concepts of compassion to our own parts as well in the form of self-compassion. Self offers compassion to our parts when they are attempting to deal with challenging life situations. Parts need to know through the experience of Self that they are not alone and have a resource to support and guide them.
Curiosity: The ability to have a sense of wonder about the world and how things work. The ability to ask questions without an agenda. A genuine interest in knowing another’s perspective. It is the ability to bring agenda-free curiosity to your own actions too. The ability to show genuine interest in why people behave as they do or why they feel the way they do instead of becoming upset about what they say or do. Self allows natural curiosity when faced with another person’s anger or upset. Curiosity replaces our defensiveness or upset.	Curiosity: The ability to have a sense of wonder about the world and how things work. The ability to ask questions without an agenda. A genuine interest in knowing another’s perspective. It is the ability to bring agenda-free curiosity to your own actions too. The ability to show genuine interest in why people behave as they do or why they feel the way they do instead of becoming upset about what they say or do. Self allows natural curiosity when faced with another person’s anger or upset. Curiosity replaces our defensiveness or upset.	Любопытство: способность удивляться миру и тому, как все устроено. Умение задавать вопросы без повестки дня. Искренний интерес к знанию точки зрения другого. Это также способность привнести любопытство, не связанное с повесткой дня, в ваши собственные действия. Способность проявлять искренний интерес к тому, почему люди ведут себя так или иначе, вместо того, чтобы расстраиваться из-за того, что они говорят или делают. «Я» допускает естественное любопытство, когда сталкивается с гневом или расстройством другого человека. Любопытство заменяет нашу оборонительную позицию или расстройство.	Curiosity: The ability to have a sense of wonder about the world and how things work. The ability to ask questions without an agenda. A genuine interest in knowing another’s perspective. It is the ability to bring agenda-free curiosity to your own actions too. The ability to show genuine interest in why people behave as they do or why they feel the way they do instead of becoming upset about what they say or do. Self allows natural curiosity when faced with another person’s anger or upset. Curiosity replaces our defensiveness or upset.
Calm: The ability to experience physiological and mental serenity regardless of the circumstances. The ability to reduce activity of the mind and body. We remain physically calm during stressful situations, and we can have a peaceful presence with other people and with our parts. The Self quality of calm allows us to be with another’s upset without becoming defensive.	Calm: The ability to experience physiological and mental serenity regardless of the circumstances. The ability to reduce activity of the mind and body. We remain physically calm during stressful situations, and we can have a peaceful presence with other people and with our parts. The Self quality of calm allows us to be with another’s upset without becoming defensive.	Спокойствие: способность испытывать физиологическое и психическое спокойствие независимо от обстоятельств. Способность снижать активность ума и тела. Мы сохраняем физическое спокойствие во время стрессовых ситуаций и можем мирно находиться в общении с другими людьми и со своими частями тела. Качество спокойствия «Я» позволяет нам спокойно относиться к тому, что кто-то расстроен, не занимая оборонительную позицию.	Calm: The ability to experience physiological and mental serenity regardless of the circumstances. The ability to reduce activity of the mind and body. We remain physically calm during stressful situations, and we can have a peaceful presence with other people and with our parts. The Self quality of calm allows us to be with another’s upset without becoming defensive.
Connectedness: The ability to maintain connection with others and to every part of ourself. A desire to reconnect when disconnection occurs. It is feeling a part of a larger entity or community. When in connection with another, we feel accepted and can relax our defenses because we know we won’t be judged, controlled, or hurt. There’s also a knowing that any misunderstandings can be repaired because of the connection. The quality of connectedness allows us to remain in relationship with our parts even when they do things we do not like or are not proud of, recognizing that all of life is connected and the sense of separateness is an illusion.	Connectedness: The ability to maintain connection with others and to every part of ourself. A desire to reconnect when disconnection occurs. It is feeling a part of a larger entity or community. When in connection with another, we feel accepted and can relax our defenses because we know we won’t be judged, controlled, or hurt. There’s also a knowing that any misunderstandings can be repaired because of the connection. The quality of connectedness allows us to remain in relationship with our parts even when they do things we do not like or are not proud of, recognizing that all of life is connected and the sense of separateness is an illusion.	Связность: способность поддерживать связь с другими и с каждой частью себя. Желание восстановить соединение, когда происходит отключение. Это ощущение себя частью более крупной организации или сообщества. В отношениях с другим человеком мы чувствуем себя принятыми и можем ослабить свою защиту, потому что знаем, что нас не будут судить, контролировать или причинять боль. Также есть знание, что любые недоразумения можно исправить благодаря связи. Качество связанности позволяет нам оставаться в отношениях со своими частями, даже когда они делают вещи, которые нам не нравятся или которыми мы не гордимся, признавая, что вся жизнь связана, а чувство обособленности — это иллюзия.	Connectedness: The ability to maintain connection with others and to every part of ourself. A desire to reconnect when disconnection occurs. It is feeling a part of a larger entity or community. When in connection with another, we feel accepted and can relax our defenses because we know we won’t be judged, controlled, or hurt. There’s also a knowing that any misunderstandings can be repaired because of the connection. The quality of connectedness allows us to remain in relationship with our parts even when they do things we do not like or are not proud of, recognizing that all of life is connected and the sense of separateness is an illusion.
Confidence: A strong belief in one’s ability to handle or repair whatever happens in life. The ability to be self-assured and know that we are worthwhile and valuable even when we make mistakes or others are upset with us. Confidence allows us not to be reduced or made to feel less-than by someone else’s negative evaluations of us or by their being upset with us.	Confidence: A strong belief in one’s ability to handle or repair whatever happens in life. The ability to be self-assured and know that we are worthwhile and valuable even when we make mistakes or others are upset with us. Confidence allows us not to be reduced or made to feel less-than by someone else’s negative evaluations of us or by their being upset with us.	Уверенность: Твердая вера в свою способность справиться или исправить все, что происходит в жизни. Способность быть уверенным в себе и знать, что мы стоим и ценны, даже когда мы совершаем ошибки или другие недовольны нами. Уверенность позволяет нам не ослабевать и не чувствовать себя хуже, чем из-за негативных оценок нас или из-за того, что кто-то расстроен нами.	Confidence: A strong belief in one’s ability to handle or repair whatever happens in life. The ability to be self-assured and know that we are worthwhile and valuable even when we make mistakes or others are upset with us. Confidence allows us not to be reduced or made to feel less-than by someone else’s negative evaluations of us or by their being upset with us.
Clarity: The ability to maintain a clear, undistorted view of situations without extreme beliefs or emotions. The ability to have a “beginner’s mind” in which many possibilities exist. Clarity affords us the opportunity to take in the necessary information to make the best decision.	Clarity: The ability to maintain a clear, undistorted view of situations without extreme beliefs or emotions. The ability to have a “beginner’s mind” in which many possibilities exist. Clarity affords us the opportunity to take in the necessary information to make the best decision.	Ясность: способность сохранять ясный, неискаженный взгляд на ситуации без крайних убеждений или эмоций. Способность иметь «разум новичка», в котором существует множество возможностей. Ясность дает нам возможность получить необходимую информацию для принятия наилучшего решения.	Clarity: The ability to maintain a clear, undistorted view of situations without extreme beliefs or emotions. The ability to have a “beginner’s mind” in which many possibilities exist. Clarity affords us the opportunity to take in the necessary information to make the best decision.
Creativity: The ability to explore and enjoy novelty. The ability to enter the “flow state” in which expression spontaneously flows out of us while we’re engaged in a pleasurable activity. The ability to encourage our parts to express themselves without shame, fear, or worthlessness. Creativity produces out-of-the-box thinking. The Self quality of creativity leads us to new and novel solutions to problems.	Creativity: The ability to explore and enjoy novelty. The ability to enter the “flow state” in which expression spontaneously flows out of us while we’re engaged in a pleasurable activity. The ability to encourage our parts to express themselves without shame, fear, or worthlessness. Creativity produces out-of-the-box thinking. The Self quality of creativity leads us to new and novel solutions to problems.	Креативность: способность исследовать и наслаждаться новизной. Способность войти в «состояние потока», в котором выражение самопроизвольно вытекает из нас, пока мы занимаемся приятной деятельностью. Способность побуждать наши части выражать себя без стыда, страха или бесполезности. Креативность порождает нестандартное мышление. Само-качество творчества ведет нас к новым и нестандартным решениям проблем.	Creativity: The ability to explore and enjoy novelty. The ability to enter the “flow state” in which expression spontaneously flows out of us while we’re engaged in a pleasurable activity. The ability to encourage our parts to express themselves without shame, fear, or worthlessness. Creativity produces out-of-the-box thinking. The Self quality of creativity leads us to new and novel solutions to problems.
Courage: The strength to face threat, challenge, or danger. The ability to recognize, apologize, and make amends for any damage caused by our words or actions. The willingness to reflect and “go inside” toward our own pain and shame, come into relationship with hurting parts, and heal the pain. The ability to speak for our extreme parts like anger, disappointment, criticism in a way that does not hurt others. The willingness to speak up for injustice. The Self quality of courage allows us to engage in ways and do things that parts of us are afraid to do.	Courage: The strength to face threat, challenge, or danger. The ability to recognize, apologize, and make amends for any damage caused by our words or actions. The willingness to reflect and “go inside” toward our own pain and shame, come into relationship with hurting parts, and heal the pain. The ability to speak for our extreme parts like anger, disappointment, criticism in a way that does not hurt others. The willingness to speak up for injustice. The Self quality of courage allows us to engage in ways and do things that parts of us are afraid to do.	Мужество: Сила противостоять угрозе, вызову или опасности. Способность распознавать, извиняться и возмещать любой ущерб, причиненный нашими словами или действиями. Готовность задуматься и «пойти внутрь» к нашей собственной боли и стыду, вступить во взаимоотношения с повреждающими частями и исцелить боль. Способность высказывать свои крайние стороны, такие как гнев, разочарование, критика, так, чтобы не причинить вреда другим. Готовность выступать в защиту несправедливости. Личностное качество смелости позволяет нам действовать и делать то, чего некоторые части нас боятся делать.	Courage: The strength to face threat, challenge, or danger. The ability to recognize, apologize, and make amends for any damage caused by our words or actions. The willingness to reflect and “go inside” toward our own pain and shame, come into relationship with hurting parts, and heal the pain. The ability to speak for our extreme parts like anger, disappointment, criticism in a way that does not hurt others. The willingness to speak up for injustice. The Self quality of courage allows us to engage in ways and do things that parts of us are afraid to do.
Everyone has a Self; however, our access to it may be limited by our parts. Access to Self is granted by the parts when they choose to relax and step back. When parts do this, Self can lead the internal family of parts through the expression of the eight qualities. It is the resource that heals the trauma and pain of the past.	Everyone has a Self; however, our access to it may be limited by our parts. Access to Self is granted by the parts when they choose to relax and step back. When parts do this, Self can lead the internal family of parts through the expression of the eight qualities. It is the resource that heals the trauma and pain of the past.	У каждого есть Я; однако наш доступ к нему может быть ограничен нашими частями. Доступ к себе предоставляется частями, когда они решают расслабиться и отступить. Когда части делают это, Самость может руководить внутренней семьей частей посредством выражения восьми качеств. Это ресурс, который исцеляет травмы и боль прошлого.	Everyone has a Self; however, our access to it may be limited by our parts. Access to Self is granted by the parts when they choose to relax and step back. When parts do this, Self can lead the internal family of parts through the expression of the eight qualities. It is the resource that heals the trauma and pain of the past.
IFS CONCEPT 2: SELF-LIKE PARTS	IFS CONCEPT 2: SELF-LIKE PARTS	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: САМОПОДОБНЫЕ ЧАСТИ	IFS CONCEPT 2: SELF-LIKE PARTS
There are parts in the system that can appear like the Self but are not the Self. These parts are referred to as Self-like parts. They are managers who keep the system in balance by behaving similarly and possessing qualities like the Self. They are empathetic, care, and want to help, but they cannot heal parts—only Self can do that. Because Self-like parts respond from empathy, not compassion, they act from a desire to protect other parts, especially exiled parts, while Self is compassionate toward our parts with an offering of healing. Self is not afraid or overwhelmed by the experiences or wounds held by our vulnerable parts, while Self-like parts will attempt to comfort our wounded parts or keep them hidden, which is a form of protecting them. They may also try to explain away the pain of what happened to us when we were young.	There are parts in the system that can appear like the Self but are not the Self. These parts are referred to as Self-like parts. They are managers who keep the system in balance by behaving similarly and possessing qualities like the Self. They are empathetic, care, and want to help, but they cannot heal parts—only Self can do that. Because Self-like parts respond from empathy, not compassion, they act from a desire to protect other parts, especially exiled parts, while Self is compassionate toward our parts with an offering of healing. Self is not afraid or overwhelmed by the experiences or wounds held by our vulnerable parts, while Self-like parts will attempt to comfort our wounded parts or keep them hidden, which is a form of protecting them. They may also try to explain away the pain of what happened to us when we were young.	В системе есть части, которые могут выглядеть как «Я», но не являются «Я». Эти части называются самоподобными частями. Они — менеджеры, которые поддерживают систему в равновесии, ведя себя одинаково и обладая такими качествами, как «Я». Они сочувствуют, заботятся и хотят помочь, но не могут исцелить части тела — это может сделать только Я. Поскольку Самоподобные части реагируют сочувствием, а не состраданием, они действуют из желания защитить другие части, особенно изгнанные, в то время как «Я» сострадает нашим частям, предлагая исцеление. «Я» не боится и не подавляется переживаниями или ранами, нанесенными нашими уязвимыми частями, в то время как самоподобные части будут пытаться утешить наши раненые части или скрывать их, что является формой их защиты. Они также могут попытаться объяснить боль от того, что случилось с нами, когда мы были молоды.	There are parts in the system that can appear like the Self but are not the Self. These parts are referred to as Self-like parts. They are managers who keep the system in balance by behaving similarly and possessing qualities like the Self. They are empathetic, care, and want to help, but they cannot heal parts—only Self can do that. Because Self-like parts respond from empathy, not compassion, they act from a desire to protect other parts, especially exiled parts, while Self is compassionate toward our parts with an offering of healing. Self is not afraid or overwhelmed by the experiences or wounds held by our vulnerable parts, while Self-like parts will attempt to comfort our wounded parts or keep them hidden, which is a form of protecting them. They may also try to explain away the pain of what happened to us when we were young.
You may notice your Self-like parts when interacting with others or in relationship with other parts. To identify one, notice if your heart is open or closed. Ask yourself, does the part seem to have an agenda? Although Self wants to help our parts heal, it doesn’t push for healing. It offers healing as a choice and allows parts to decide. Self-like parts, on the other hand, try to push parts—and other people—in a particular direction. When Self-like parts express curiosity, it is often a figure-it-out type of curiosity coming from the head, while the curiosity of Self comes from a true desire to know about the other without any agenda.	You may notice your Self-like parts when interacting with others or in relationship with other parts. To identify one, notice if your heart is open or closed. Ask yourself, does the part seem to have an agenda? Although Self wants to help our parts heal, it doesn’t push for healing. It offers healing as a choice and allows parts to decide. Self-like parts, on the other hand, try to push parts—and other people—in a particular direction. When Self-like parts express curiosity, it is often a figure-it-out type of curiosity coming from the head, while the curiosity of Self comes from a true desire to know about the other without any agenda.	Вы можете заметить свои части, подобные Себе, при взаимодействии с другими людьми или во взаимоотношениях с другими частями. Чтобы определить его, обратите внимание, открыто ли ваше сердце или закрыто. Спросите себя, есть ли у этой части какие-то планы? Хотя «Я» хочет помочь нашим частям исцелиться, оно не настаивает на исцелении. Он предлагает исцеление как выбор и позволяет частям принимать решение. С другой стороны, самоподобные части пытаются подтолкнуть части – и других людей – в определенном направлении. Когда части, подобные Самости, выражают любопытство, это часто любопытство типа самоанализа, исходящее из головы, в то время как любопытство Самости исходит из истинного желания узнать о другом без какой-либо цели.	You may notice your Self-like parts when interacting with others or in relationship with other parts. To identify one, notice if your heart is open or closed. Ask yourself, does the part seem to have an agenda? Although Self wants to help our parts heal, it doesn’t push for healing. It offers healing as a choice and allows parts to decide. Self-like parts, on the other hand, try to push parts—and other people—in a particular direction. When Self-like parts express curiosity, it is often a figure-it-out type of curiosity coming from the head, while the curiosity of Self comes from a true desire to know about the other without any agenda.
Ancestors and Access to Self	Ancestors and Access to Self	Предки и доступ к себе	Ancestors and Access to Self
Our ancestors hold great knowledge about our lineage, history, strengths, and challenges. Connecting with them and their wisdom can enhance the healing process. Bringing your ancestors into the process creates greater access to Self, both your own and your ancestors’. As we saw earlier, Self is the healing agent within our system. Therefore, it makes sense that having more access to Self internally and externally can positively impact the healing process.	Our ancestors hold great knowledge about our lineage, history, strengths, and challenges. Connecting with them and their wisdom can enhance the healing process. Bringing your ancestors into the process creates greater access to Self, both your own and your ancestors’. As we saw earlier, Self is the healing agent within our system. Therefore, it makes sense that having more access to Self internally and externally can positively impact the healing process.	Наши предки обладают огромными знаниями о нашем происхождении, истории, сильных сторонах и проблемах. Общение с ними и их мудростью может ускорить процесс исцеления. Вовлечение ваших предков в этот процесс создает больший доступ к себе, как вашему собственному, так и вашим предкам. Как мы видели ранее, «Я» — это исцеляющий агент внутри нашей системы. Следовательно, имеет смысл, что больший доступ к себе как внутри, так и снаружи может положительно повлиять на процесс исцеления.	Our ancestors hold great knowledge about our lineage, history, strengths, and challenges. Connecting with them and their wisdom can enhance the healing process. Bringing your ancestors into the process creates greater access to Self, both your own and your ancestors’. As we saw earlier, Self is the healing agent within our system. Therefore, it makes sense that having more access to Self internally and externally can positively impact the healing process.
Connecting with your ancestors in the IFS healing process increases the amount of Self-energy available for healing. Instead of only having access to your Self-energy (which is sufficient for healing all by itself), you magnify the amount and intensity of Self-energy by inviting connection with your Self-led ancestors. This increase of Self-energy may help you to heal more quickly, more deeply, and more completely. Our ancestors are rooting for us and will assist and support us when we invite them to do so. Just as my ancestors joined me in creating the meditations I share in this book, your ancestors are available as guides in your life too.	Connecting with your ancestors in the IFS healing process increases the amount of Self-energy available for healing. Instead of only having access to your Self-energy (which is sufficient for healing all by itself), you magnify the amount and intensity of Self-energy by inviting connection with your Self-led ancestors. This increase of Self-energy may help you to heal more quickly, more deeply, and more completely. Our ancestors are rooting for us and will assist and support us when we invite them to do so. Just as my ancestors joined me in creating the meditations I share in this book, your ancestors are available as guides in your life too.	Соединение со своими предками в процессе исцеления IFS увеличивает количество внутренней энергии, доступной для исцеления. Вместо того, чтобы иметь доступ только к вашей Само-энергии (которой достаточно для исцеления), вы увеличиваете количество и интенсивность Само-энергии, приглашая к связи со своими Самостоятельными предками. Это увеличение собственной энергии может помочь вам исцелиться быстрее, глубже и полнее. Наши предки болеет за нас и будут помогать и поддерживать нас, когда мы пригласим их сделать это. Точно так же, как мои предки присоединились ко мне в создании медитаций, которыми я делюсь в этой книге, ваши предки также могут стать наставниками в вашей жизни.	Connecting with your ancestors in the IFS healing process increases the amount of Self-energy available for healing. Instead of only having access to your Self-energy (which is sufficient for healing all by itself), you magnify the amount and intensity of Self-energy by inviting connection with your Self-led ancestors. This increase of Self-energy may help you to heal more quickly, more deeply, and more completely. Our ancestors are rooting for us and will assist and support us when we invite them to do so. Just as my ancestors joined me in creating the meditations I share in this book, your ancestors are available as guides in your life too.
Case Vignette: Grieved Empty Nester	Case Vignette: Grieved Empty Nester	Краткое описание дела: Опечаленный пустой Нестер	Case Vignette: Grieved Empty Nester
Christina, a married 48-year-old Black woman, came to therapy feeling depressed, directionless, useless, and without purpose after her only living son, Evan, graduated from medical school, moved across the country for employment, and asked his girlfriend to marry him. The feelings of loss were compounded by the loss of Evan’s identical twin, Kevin, who had died in a boating accident at age 12. Christina realized that she had not allowed herself to fully grieve the earlier loss because she poured herself into her surviving son. Both her sons were on the capsizing boat that took Kevin’s life, and she is thankful she did not lose them both.	Christina, a married 48-year-old Black woman, came to therapy feeling depressed, directionless, useless, and without purpose after her only living son, Evan, graduated from medical school, moved across the country for employment, and asked his girlfriend to marry him. The feelings of loss were compounded by the loss of Evan’s identical twin, Kevin, who had died in a boating accident at age 12. Christina realized that she had not allowed herself to fully grieve the earlier loss because she poured herself into her surviving son. Both her sons were on the capsizing boat that took Kevin’s life, and she is thankful she did not lose them both.	Кристина, замужняя 48-летняя чернокожая женщина, пришла на терапию с чувством депрессии, бесцельности, бесполезности и бесцельности после того, как ее единственный живой сын Эван окончил медицинскую школу, переехал через всю страну в поисках работы и попросил свою девушку выйти за него замуж. Чувство утраты усугублялось потерей однояйцевого близнеца Эвана, Кевина, который погиб в катастрофе в возрасте 12 лет. Кристина осознала, что не позволила себе полностью оплакать предыдущую потерю, потому что отдала себя выжившему сыну. Оба ее сына были на перевернувшейся лодке, которая унесла жизнь Кевина, и она благодарна, что не потеряла их обоих.	Christina, a married 48-year-old Black woman, came to therapy feeling depressed, directionless, useless, and without purpose after her only living son, Evan, graduated from medical school, moved across the country for employment, and asked his girlfriend to marry him. The feelings of loss were compounded by the loss of Evan’s identical twin, Kevin, who had died in a boating accident at age 12. Christina realized that she had not allowed herself to fully grieve the earlier loss because she poured herself into her surviving son. Both her sons were on the capsizing boat that took Kevin’s life, and she is thankful she did not lose them both.
Prior to Kevin’s death, Christina had a vibrant social life. She belonged to local clubs. She spent time traveling with her family and with girlfriends. She was active in her church. She worked in her husband’s medical practice as the office manager. However, after the loss of Kevin, she collapsed her life to solely focusing on Evan. He became the center of her world. She pulled back from social engagements. She quit her job. The one connection she maintained outside of her family was to the church. She explained it was the one connection that “kept me from losing my mind.”	Prior to Kevin’s death, Christina had a vibrant social life. She belonged to local clubs. She spent time traveling with her family and with girlfriends. She was active in her church. She worked in her husband’s medical practice as the office manager. However, after the loss of Kevin, she collapsed her life to solely focusing on Evan. He became the center of her world. She pulled back from social engagements. She quit her job. The one connection she maintained outside of her family was to the church. She explained it was the one connection that “kept me from losing my mind.”	До смерти Кевина Кристина вела яркую светскую жизнь. Она принадлежала к местным клубам. Она проводила время, путешествуя со своей семьей и подругами. Она была активна в своей церкви. Она работала в медицинской практике мужа офис-менеджером. Однако после потери Кевина она изменила свою жизнь, сосредоточившись исключительно на Эване. Он стал центром ее мира. Она отказалась от социальных обязательств. Она ушла с работы. Единственная связь, которую она поддерживала за пределами своей семьи, была с церковью. Она объяснила, что это была единственная связь, которая «не давала мне сойти с ума».	Prior to Kevin’s death, Christina had a vibrant social life. She belonged to local clubs. She spent time traveling with her family and with girlfriends. She was active in her church. She worked in her husband’s medical practice as the office manager. However, after the loss of Kevin, she collapsed her life to solely focusing on Evan. He became the center of her world. She pulled back from social engagements. She quit her job. The one connection she maintained outside of her family was to the church. She explained it was the one connection that “kept me from losing my mind.”
Our work together was long and arduous. Christina’s system was highly protective and did not want to address the connection between Evan’s launch into adult life and the earlier loss of his twin, Kevin. She felt comfortable talking about being an empty nester and her desire to find purpose, yet she was unwilling to accept that her son did not need her in the same capacity he once did. She found his behavior toward her dismissive and hurtful. She was jealous of the amount of time he spent with his fiancée and resented how little time he had for her and his father. I noticed an overinvestment in her son’s life and little focus on her own, even though she had come into therapy with the stated goal of finding purpose in her life for that very reason: so she wouldn’t be hyper-focused on and enmeshed with her son. I realized that to help her create purpose in her life as an empty nester, we would have to come into relationship with the parts of her that were experiencing grief, which she called depression.	Our work together was long and arduous. Christina’s system was highly protective and did not want to address the connection between Evan’s launch into adult life and the earlier loss of his twin, Kevin. She felt comfortable talking about being an empty nester and her desire to find purpose, yet she was unwilling to accept that her son did not need her in the same capacity he once did. She found his behavior toward her dismissive and hurtful. She was jealous of the amount of time he spent with his fiancée and resented how little time he had for her and his father. I noticed an overinvestment in her son’s life and little focus on her own, even though she had come into therapy with the stated goal of finding purpose in her life for that very reason: so she wouldn’t be hyper-focused on and enmeshed with her son. I realized that to help her create purpose in her life as an empty nester, we would have to come into relationship with the parts of her that were experiencing grief, which she called depression.	Наша совместная работа была долгой и трудной. Система Кристины была очень защитной и не хотела учитывать связь между выходом Эвана во взрослую жизнь и более ранней потерей его близнеца Кевина. Ей было комфортно говорить о том, что она пустое гнездо, и о своем желании найти цель, но она не желала признавать, что ее сын не нуждался в ней в том же качестве, в котором он когда-то нуждался. Она нашла его поведение по отношению к ней пренебрежительным и обидным. Она завидовала тому, сколько времени он проводил со своей невестой, и возмущалась, как мало времени он уделял ей и своему отцу. Я заметил чрезмерный вклад в жизнь ее сына и мало внимания к себе, хотя она пришла на терапию с заявленной целью найти цель в своей жизни именно по этой причине: чтобы она не была чрезмерно сосредоточена на ней и не была запуталась в ней. ее сын. Я понял, что для того, чтобы помочь ей найти цель в ее жизни в пустом гнезде, нам придется установить отношения с теми частями ее личности, которые испытывают горе, которое она называет депрессией.	Our work together was long and arduous. Christina’s system was highly protective and did not want to address the connection between Evan’s launch into adult life and the earlier loss of his twin, Kevin. She felt comfortable talking about being an empty nester and her desire to find purpose, yet she was unwilling to accept that her son did not need her in the same capacity he once did. She found his behavior toward her dismissive and hurtful. She was jealous of the amount of time he spent with his fiancée and resented how little time he had for her and his father. I noticed an overinvestment in her son’s life and little focus on her own, even though she had come into therapy with the stated goal of finding purpose in her life for that very reason: so she wouldn’t be hyper-focused on and enmeshed with her son. I realized that to help her create purpose in her life as an empty nester, we would have to come into relationship with the parts of her that were experiencing grief, which she called depression.
Christina made many attempts to re-engage life by resuming activities she had found fulfilling before Kevin’s death. She tried crocheting, which had been an enjoyable stress reliever in the past. This time, though, she would start projects, lose interest, and not finish them. Then she would take on a new project with renewed excitement, but within a few weeks she’d discard the new project too. She would make promises to her friends to get together, then cancel as the date approached, sometimes even on the day of the event. She even considered going back to work in her husband’s practice or returning to school for an advanced degree, but found reasons not to follow through on either. Her life remained reduced to housekeeping and church.	Christina made many attempts to re-engage life by resuming activities she had found fulfilling before Kevin’s death. She tried crocheting, which had been an enjoyable stress reliever in the past. This time, though, she would start projects, lose interest, and not finish them. Then she would take on a new project with renewed excitement, but within a few weeks she’d discard the new project too. She would make promises to her friends to get together, then cancel as the date approached, sometimes even on the day of the event. She even considered going back to work in her husband’s practice or returning to school for an advanced degree, but found reasons not to follow through on either. Her life remained reduced to housekeeping and church.	Кристина предприняла множество попыток вернуться к жизни, возобновив деятельность, которая приносила ей удовлетворение до смерти Кевина. Она попробовала вязать крючком, что раньше помогало ей снять стресс. Однако на этот раз она начала проекты, потеряла интерес и не завершила их. Затем она с новым энтузиазмом бралась за новый проект, но через несколько недель отказывалась и от нового проекта. Она обещала своим друзьям собраться вместе, а затем отменяла их по мере приближения даты, иногда даже в день мероприятия. Она даже подумывала о том, чтобы вернуться к работе в практике мужа или вернуться в школу, чтобы получить ученую степень, но нашла причины не доводить дело до конца. Ее жизнь по-прежнему сводилась к ведению домашнего хозяйства и церкви.	Christina made many attempts to re-engage life by resuming activities she had found fulfilling before Kevin’s death. She tried crocheting, which had been an enjoyable stress reliever in the past. This time, though, she would start projects, lose interest, and not finish them. Then she would take on a new project with renewed excitement, but within a few weeks she’d discard the new project too. She would make promises to her friends to get together, then cancel as the date approached, sometimes even on the day of the event. She even considered going back to work in her husband’s practice or returning to school for an advanced degree, but found reasons not to follow through on either. Her life remained reduced to housekeeping and church.
After Christina and I had spent about a year working with the parts of her that wanted her to find purpose and the parts that blocked or undermined her attempts, one day she arrived at my office bawling uncontrollably. She shared her awareness that she could never have a full life again until she came to terms with the loss of Kevin. This was the first time she had overtly acknowledged a connection between her son’s death and her lack of purpose, not to mention expressing willingness to work with the loss.	After Christina and I had spent about a year working with the parts of her that wanted her to find purpose and the parts that blocked or undermined her attempts, one day she arrived at my office bawling uncontrollably. She shared her awareness that she could never have a full life again until she came to terms with the loss of Kevin. This was the first time she had overtly acknowledged a connection between her son’s death and her lack of purpose, not to mention expressing willingness to work with the loss.	После того, как мы с Кристиной провели около года, работая с теми частями ее тела, которые хотели, чтобы она нашла цель, и частями, которые блокировали или срывали ее попытки, однажды она пришла в мой офис, бесконтрольно рыдая. Она поделилась своим пониманием того, что никогда больше не сможет жить полноценной жизнью, пока не смирится с потерей Кевина. Это был первый раз, когда она открыто признала связь между смертью сына и отсутствием у нее цели, не говоря уже о том, что выразила готовность работать с утратой.	After Christina and I had spent about a year working with the parts of her that wanted her to find purpose and the parts that blocked or undermined her attempts, one day she arrived at my office bawling uncontrollably. She shared her awareness that she could never have a full life again until she came to terms with the loss of Kevin. This was the first time she had overtly acknowledged a connection between her son’s death and her lack of purpose, not to mention expressing willingness to work with the loss.
What we discovered with Christina’s system was an alliance of parts working together to keep the pain of her son’s death out of her awareness. Some parts did this by keeping her focused on various ways to engage in life, while others undermined this engagement; some held the feelings of sadness, depression, and anger; others kept her hyper-focused on Evan’s life and the pain of her decreased involvement in it. In the year we worked together, the parts that wanted to keep the grief out of awareness had gradually learned to trust Christina, me, and the IFS process. After the day she came to session bawling with her newfound awareness, the path and pace of her treatment moved steadily forward. Christina now wanted to face her grief. She saw it as the key to her healing and to discovering new purpose.	What we discovered with Christina’s system was an alliance of parts working together to keep the pain of her son’s death out of her awareness. Some parts did this by keeping her focused on various ways to engage in life, while others undermined this engagement; some held the feelings of sadness, depression, and anger; others kept her hyper-focused on Evan’s life and the pain of her decreased involvement in it. In the year we worked together, the parts that wanted to keep the grief out of awareness had gradually learned to trust Christina, me, and the IFS process. After the day she came to session bawling with her newfound awareness, the path and pace of her treatment moved steadily forward. Christina now wanted to face her grief. She saw it as the key to her healing and to discovering new purpose.	С помощью системы Кристины мы обнаружили союз частей, работающих вместе, чтобы скрыть от ее сознания боль смерти ее сына. Некоторые части делали это, заставляя ее сосредоточиться на различных способах участия в жизни, тогда как другие подрывали эту вовлеченность; некоторые испытывали чувство печали, депрессии и гнева; другие заставляли ее чрезмерно сосредоточиться на жизни Эвана и на боли от ее меньшего участия в ней. За год нашей совместной работы те части, которые хотели скрыть горе от осознания, постепенно научились доверять Кристине, мне и процессу IFS. После того дня, когда она пришла на сеанс, рыдая от вновь обретенного осознания, путь и темп ее лечения неуклонно продвигались вперед. Кристина теперь хотела встретиться лицом к лицу со своим горем. Она видела в этом ключ к своему исцелению и открытию новой цели.	What we discovered with Christina’s system was an alliance of parts working together to keep the pain of her son’s death out of her awareness. Some parts did this by keeping her focused on various ways to engage in life, while others undermined this engagement; some held the feelings of sadness, depression, and anger; others kept her hyper-focused on Evan’s life and the pain of her decreased involvement in it. In the year we worked together, the parts that wanted to keep the grief out of awareness had gradually learned to trust Christina, me, and the IFS process. After the day she came to session bawling with her newfound awareness, the path and pace of her treatment moved steadily forward. Christina now wanted to face her grief. She saw it as the key to her healing and to discovering new purpose.
Here are some examples of how Christina came into relationship with her parts, using the qualities of Self to get to know each of them.	Here are some examples of how Christina came into relationship with her parts, using the qualities of Self to get to know each of them.	Вот несколько примеров того, как Кристина вступила в отношения со своими частями, используя качества Самости, чтобы узнать каждую из них.	Here are some examples of how Christina came into relationship with her parts, using the qualities of Self to get to know each of them.
Christina had several protectors who were grieving the loss of Kevin and managed their grief by keeping busy in various ways. She first came into a relationship with a part who presented her with options to keep busy, such as crocheting, connecting with friends, and going back to school or work. She was genuinely curious about the role of this part in her system. As she showed this part agenda-free curiosity, the part shared that it had to keep busy and distracted to keep from breaking down and to keep Christina safe from a pain so deep that she couldn’t possibly survive it. Christina appreciated this part’s care and protection; she expressed her compassion for how hard the part had been working and her appreciation of its efforts to keep her from deeper pain.	Christina had several protectors who were grieving the loss of Kevin and managed their grief by keeping busy in various ways. She first came into a relationship with a part who presented her with options to keep busy, such as crocheting, connecting with friends, and going back to school or work. She was genuinely curious about the role of this part in her system. As she showed this part agenda-free curiosity, the part shared that it had to keep busy and distracted to keep from breaking down and to keep Christina safe from a pain so deep that she couldn’t possibly survive it. Christina appreciated this part’s care and protection; she expressed her compassion for how hard the part had been working and her appreciation of its efforts to keep her from deeper pain.	У Кристины было несколько защитников, которые скорбели о потере Кевина и справлялись со своим горем, занимаясь разными делами. Сначала она вступила в отношения с частью, которая предлагала ей варианты, чем заняться, например, вязание крючком, общение с друзьями, возвращение в школу или на работу. Ей было искренне интересно узнать о роли этой части в ее системе. По мере того, как она демонстрировала этой части любопытство, свободное от повестки дня, часть поделилась, что ей нужно быть занятой и отвлекаться, чтобы не сломаться и уберечь Кристину от боли настолько глубокой, что она не сможет ее пережить. Кристина ценила заботу и защиту этой части; она выразила сочувствие тому, как усердно работала эта часть, и свою признательность за ее усилия уберечь ее от более глубокой боли.	Christina had several protectors who were grieving the loss of Kevin and managed their grief by keeping busy in various ways. She first came into a relationship with a part who presented her with options to keep busy, such as crocheting, connecting with friends, and going back to school or work. She was genuinely curious about the role of this part in her system. As she showed this part agenda-free curiosity, the part shared that it had to keep busy and distracted to keep from breaking down and to keep Christina safe from a pain so deep that she couldn’t possibly survive it. Christina appreciated this part’s care and protection; she expressed her compassion for how hard the part had been working and her appreciation of its efforts to keep her from deeper pain.
Next, we met a part carrying anger about the untimely death of Kevin. This part blamed everyone involved. It was critical and blamed Christina for letting the boys go boating that day without either parent present. It blamed the rescue crew for how long it took to pull Kevin out of the water. It blamed the EMTs for not getting him to the hospital fast enough. It blamed the hospital staff. Anyone who had encountered Kevin, directly or indirectly, was culpable and complicit in his death in the eyes of this part. There were other parts in Christina’s system that were afraid of this part’s fury, but she displayed courage in meeting the level of this part’s anger with a greater measure of calm. She also listened to the part’s sense of injustice at Kevin’s life being taken at such a young age. This part ultimately felt the connection between itself and Christina’s Self, and it felt seen and understood.	Next, we met a part carrying anger about the untimely death of Kevin. This part blamed everyone involved. It was critical and blamed Christina for letting the boys go boating that day without either parent present. It blamed the rescue crew for how long it took to pull Kevin out of the water. It blamed the EMTs for not getting him to the hospital fast enough. It blamed the hospital staff. Anyone who had encountered Kevin, directly or indirectly, was culpable and complicit in his death in the eyes of this part. There were other parts in Christina’s system that were afraid of this part’s fury, but she displayed courage in meeting the level of this part’s anger with a greater measure of calm. She also listened to the part’s sense of injustice at Kevin’s life being taken at such a young age. This part ultimately felt the connection between itself and Christina’s Self, and it felt seen and understood.	Далее мы встретили часть, несущую гнев по поводу безвременной смерти Кевина. Эта часть обвинила всех причастных. Это было критично и обвиняло Кристину в том, что она позволила мальчикам покататься на лодке в тот день без присутствия кого-либо из родителей. Он обвинил спасательную команду в том, как долго они вытаскивали Кевина из воды. Он обвинил медиков в том, что они не доставили его в больницу достаточно быстро. В этом виноват персонал больницы. Любой, кто сталкивался с Кевином, прямо или косвенно, был виновен и соучастник в его смерти в глазах этой части. В системе Кристины были и другие части, которые боялись ярости этой части, но она проявила смелость, встретив уровень гнева этой части с большей степенью спокойствия. Она также прислушивалась к ощущению несправедливости в отношении жизни Кевина, забранной в таком юном возрасте. Эта часть в конечном итоге почувствовала связь между собой и Самостью Кристины, почувствовала, что ее видят и понимают.	Next, we met a part carrying anger about the untimely death of Kevin. This part blamed everyone involved. It was critical and blamed Christina for letting the boys go boating that day without either parent present. It blamed the rescue crew for how long it took to pull Kevin out of the water. It blamed the EMTs for not getting him to the hospital fast enough. It blamed the hospital staff. Anyone who had encountered Kevin, directly or indirectly, was culpable and complicit in his death in the eyes of this part. There were other parts in Christina’s system that were afraid of this part’s fury, but she displayed courage in meeting the level of this part’s anger with a greater measure of calm. She also listened to the part’s sense of injustice at Kevin’s life being taken at such a young age. This part ultimately felt the connection between itself and Christina’s Self, and it felt seen and understood.
As we met and got to know more of Christina’s protectors, she made another connection: the connection between the loss of Kevin, the launching of Evan, and the death of her mother when Christina was 11. The part that her protectors most wanted to keep out of Christina’s awareness was the 11-year-old who hid her unbearable pain away to function in life.	As we met and got to know more of Christina’s protectors, she made another connection: the connection between the loss of Kevin, the launching of Evan, and the death of her mother when Christina was 11. The part that her protectors most wanted to keep out of Christina’s awareness was the 11-year-old who hid her unbearable pain away to function in life.	Когда мы встретились и узнали больше о защитниках Кристины, она установила еще одну связь: связь между потерей Кевина, увольнением Эвана и смертью ее матери, когда Кристине было 11 лет. Та часть, которую ее защитники больше всего хотели сохранить. вне поля зрения Кристины осталась 11-летняя девочка, которая скрывала свою невыносимую боль, чтобы жить нормальной жизнью.	As we met and got to know more of Christina’s protectors, she made another connection: the connection between the loss of Kevin, the launching of Evan, and the death of her mother when Christina was 11. The part that her protectors most wanted to keep out of Christina’s awareness was the 11-year-old who hid her unbearable pain away to function in life.
It was only through working with Christina’s fiercest protectors, the ones who managed her life through getting her haphazardly involved in new projects and activities, the one hyper-focused on Evan, and the one that held anger and rage, that we found the core trauma that connected it all: the loss of her mother. This pivotal loss was the blueprint for how Christina’s system organized itself around future losses. Her ability to engage her parts with the qualities of Self was the catalyst for the deeper healing that came later.	It was only through working with Christina’s fiercest protectors, the ones who managed her life through getting her haphazardly involved in new projects and activities, the one hyper-focused on Evan, and the one that held anger and rage, that we found the core trauma that connected it all: the loss of her mother. This pivotal loss was the blueprint for how Christina’s system organized itself around future losses. Her ability to engage her parts with the qualities of Self was the catalyst for the deeper healing that came later.	Только работая с самыми яростными защитниками Кристины, с теми, кто управлял ее жизнью, вовлекая ее в новые проекты и занятия, с теми, кто был чрезмерно сосредоточен на Эване, и с теми, кто сдерживал гнев и ярость, мы обнаружили основную травму. все это связывало: потеря матери. Эта ключевая потеря стала основой того, как система Кристины организовалась вокруг будущих потерь. Ее способность задействовать свои части с качествами Самости стала катализатором более глубокого исцеления, которое наступило позже.	It was only through working with Christina’s fiercest protectors, the ones who managed her life through getting her haphazardly involved in new projects and activities, the one hyper-focused on Evan, and the one that held anger and rage, that we found the core trauma that connected it all: the loss of her mother. This pivotal loss was the blueprint for how Christina’s system organized itself around future losses. Her ability to engage her parts with the qualities of Self was the catalyst for the deeper healing that came later.
Christina’s work befriending her parts and building relationships with them relaxed her protectors enough to reveal this younger part of her who carried the pain of her mother dying. It was working with this younger part, called an exile, that Christina was able to achieve deep healing, to redefine her relationship with Evan, fully grieve Kevin, and re-engage her life.	Christina’s work befriending her parts and building relationships with them relaxed her protectors enough to reveal this younger part of her who carried the pain of her mother dying. It was working with this younger part, called an exile, that Christina was able to achieve deep healing, to redefine her relationship with Evan, fully grieve Kevin, and re-engage her life.	Работа Кристины по подружке со своими частями и построению отношений с ними достаточно расслабила ее защитников, чтобы раскрыть эту младшую часть ее, которая перенесла боль умирающей матери. Именно работая с этой молодой частью, называемой изгнанницей, Кристина смогла достичь глубокого исцеления, переопределить свои отношения с Эваном, полностью оплакать Кевина и вновь начать свою жизнь.	Christina’s work befriending her parts and building relationships with them relaxed her protectors enough to reveal this younger part of her who carried the pain of her mother dying. It was working with this younger part, called an exile, that Christina was able to achieve deep healing, to redefine her relationship with Evan, fully grieve Kevin, and re-engage her life.
Meditation: Self Qualities	Meditation: Self Qualities	Медитация: Самокачества	Meditation: Self Qualities
Note: the majority of the meditations in this book were created with the guidance of my ancestors. I created this meditation and two others without ancestral input. The Self Qualities meditation uses affirmation and intentions to help you connect with the eight qualities of Self. Notice what happens in your system as each statement is heard. Some parts may not agree with the statements or may have a hard time with them. If this happens, notice what the parts are experiencing and make no attempt to change it.	Note: the majority of the meditations in this book were created with the guidance of my ancestors. I created this meditation and two others without ancestral input. The Self Qualities meditation uses affirmation and intentions to help you connect with the eight qualities of Self. Notice what happens in your system as each statement is heard. Some parts may not agree with the statements or may have a hard time with them. If this happens, notice what the parts are experiencing and make no attempt to change it.	Примечание: большинство медитаций в этой книге были созданы под руководством моих предков. Я создал эту медитацию и две другие без участия предков. Медитация «Самость» использует утверждения и намерения, чтобы помочь вам соединиться с восемью качествами «Я». Обратите внимание, что происходит в вашей системе, когда вы слышите каждое утверждение. Некоторые части могут не соглашаться с утверждениями или испытывать с ними трудности. Если это произойдет, обратите внимание на то, что испытывают детали, и не пытайтесь это изменить.	Note: the majority of the meditations in this book were created with the guidance of my ancestors. I created this meditation and two others without ancestral input. The Self Qualities meditation uses affirmation and intentions to help you connect with the eight qualities of Self. Notice what happens in your system as each statement is heard. Some parts may not agree with the statements or may have a hard time with them. If this happens, notice what the parts are experiencing and make no attempt to change it.
Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Закройте глаза или смягчите взгляд.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.
Take note of your breath.	Take note of your breath.	Обратите внимание на свое дыхание.	Take note of your breath.
As you breathe, allow your awareness to take notice of each breath.	As you breathe, allow your awareness to take notice of each breath.	Когда вы дышите, позвольте своему сознанию замечать каждый вдох.	As you breathe, allow your awareness to take notice of each breath.
Notice any shifts as you breathe.	Notice any shifts as you breathe.	Обратите внимание на любые изменения во время дыхания.	Notice any shifts as you breathe.
Bring your attention to your breath as it enters your heart space.	Bring your attention to your breath as it enters your heart space.	Обратите внимание на свое дыхание, когда оно входит в пространство вашего сердца.	Bring your attention to your breath as it enters your heart space.
Focus on what you’re experiencing in your heart.	Focus on what you’re experiencing in your heart.	Сосредоточьтесь на том, что вы испытываете в своем сердце.	Focus on what you’re experiencing in your heart.
Do you notice warmth, tightness, a softening, tenderness? Is your heart space open or closed?	Do you notice warmth, tightness, a softening, tenderness? Is your heart space open or closed?	Замечаете ли вы тепло, стянутость, смягчение, нежность? Ваше сердечное пространство открыто или закрыто?	Do you notice warmth, tightness, a softening, tenderness? Is your heart space open or closed?
Be with what is present as you meditate on the intentions that follow. You may have parts that don’t agree or find these statements challenging. If this happens, just be with the parts to understand their concerns.	Be with what is present as you meditate on the intentions that follow. You may have parts that don’t agree or find these statements challenging. If this happens, just be with the parts to understand their concerns.	Будьте с тем, что присутствует, медитируя о последующих намерениях. У вас могут быть части, которые не согласуются друг с другом или которые кажутся вам спорными. Если это произойдет, просто будьте рядом с частями, чтобы понять их опасения.	Be with what is present as you meditate on the intentions that follow. You may have parts that don’t agree or find these statements challenging. If this happens, just be with the parts to understand their concerns.
I have compassion for myself that radiates out to others.	I have compassion for myself that radiates out to others.	У меня есть сострадание к себе, которое излучается на других.	I have compassion for myself that radiates out to others.
My creativity allows for free expression.	My creativity allows for free expression.	Моё творчество допускает свободное самовыражение.	My creativity allows for free expression.
I view situations and people with clarity.	I view situations and people with clarity.	Я смотрю на ситуации и людей ясно.	I view situations and people with clarity.
Calmness is the baseline from which I operate.	Calmness is the baseline from which I operate.	Спокойствие — это основа, от которой я действую.	Calmness is the baseline from which I operate.
I maintain connection with every part of myself.	I maintain connection with every part of myself.	Я поддерживаю связь с каждой частью себя.	I maintain connection with every part of myself.
I walk in the wonder of curiosity.	I walk in the wonder of curiosity.	Я иду в чуде любопытства.	I walk in the wonder of curiosity.
I have the courage to admit and accept when I am wrong.	I have the courage to admit and accept when I am wrong.	У меня есть смелость признать и принять свою неправоту.	I have the courage to admit and accept when I am wrong.
I have the confidence of knowing I am a worthwhile person no matter what is happening in my world.	I have the confidence of knowing I am a worthwhile person no matter what is happening in my world.	Я уверен, что знаю, что я достойный человек, независимо от того, что происходит в моем мире.	I have the confidence of knowing I am a worthwhile person no matter what is happening in my world.
I am Confident that there are Creative ways to Connect inside to witness my parts with Clarity, while remaining Calm and being Courageous enough to stay Curious when my parts get activated, remembering that a little Compassion goes a long way.	I am Confident that there are Creative ways to Connect inside to witness my parts with Clarity, while remaining Calm and being Courageous enough to stay Curious when my parts get activated, remembering that a little Compassion goes a long way.	Я Уверен, что существуют Творческие способы Соединиться внутри, чтобы с Ясностью наблюдать за своими частями, оставаясь при этом Спокойным и достаточно Смелым, чтобы оставаться Любопытным, когда мои части активируются, помня, что немного Сострадания имеет большое значение.	I am Confident that there are Creative ways to Connect inside to witness my parts with Clarity, while remaining Calm and being Courageous enough to stay Curious when my parts get activated, remembering that a little Compassion goes a long way.
Bring your awareness to your breath, and if it feels right, just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	Bring your awareness to your breath, and if it feels right, just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	Сосредоточьте свое внимание на своем дыхании, и, если оно кажется вам правильным, просто дышите, возвращаясь в этот момент и пространство.	Bring your awareness to your breath, and if it feels right, just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.
Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Медленно откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.	Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.	Достаньте свой дневник и быстро запишите все, что вы хотели бы уловить из этой медитации. Это может быть откровение, размышление, мимолетная мысль или чувственное восприятие.	Take out your journal and quickly write whatever you would like to capture from this meditation. It could be a revelation, a reflection, a fleeting thought, or sensory perception.
Exercise 2: Self Qualities Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Self Qualities Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Вопросы для дневника самокачества	Exercise 2: Self Qualities Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Self Qualities meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Self Qualities meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили медитацию «Самооценки» и написали краткий дневник, потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, отвечая на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Self Qualities meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
Which intentions resonate with you?	Which intentions resonate with you?	Какие намерения вам резонируют?	Which intentions resonate with you?
Which ones do you want to live into?	Which ones do you want to live into?	В каких из них вы хотите жить?	Which ones do you want to live into?
Were there any intentions you found difficult or challenging to relate to?	Were there any intentions you found difficult or challenging to relate to?	Были ли какие-либо намерения, которые вам было трудно или сложно реализовать?	Were there any intentions you found difficult or challenging to relate to?
Did any part become activated?	Did any part become activated?	Какая-то часть активировалась?	Did any part become activated?
Which parts keep you from living into the intentions you’d like to?	Which parts keep you from living into the intentions you’d like to?	Что мешает вам жить в соответствии с желаемыми намерениями?	Which parts keep you from living into the intentions you’d like to?
When a part gets activated, which intentions can you lean in to?	When a part gets activated, which intentions can you lean in to?	Когда какая-то часть активируется, на какие намерения вы можете опереться?	When a part gets activated, which intentions can you lean in to?
Exercise 3: Self Qualities Practice & Awareness	Exercise 3: Self Qualities Practice & Awareness	Упражнение 3: Практика и осознание собственных качеств	Exercise 3: Self Qualities Practice & Awareness
Over the next week, see if you can notice when you experience qualities of Self when interacting with others and/or with your parts. Make notes on your experience in your journal.	Over the next week, see if you can notice when you experience qualities of Self when interacting with others and/or with your parts. Make notes on your experience in your journal.	В течение следующей недели посмотрите, сможете ли вы заметить, когда вы испытываете качества Я при взаимодействии с другими и/или со своими частями. Делайте записи о своем опыте в своем дневнике.	Over the next week, see if you can notice when you experience qualities of Self when interacting with others and/or with your parts. Make notes on your experience in your journal.
Quality of Self Describe your experience What are your impressions?	Quality of Self Describe your experience What are your impressions?	Качество себя Опишите свой опыт Каковы ваши впечатления?	Quality of Self Describe your experience What are your impressions?
Compassion	Compassion	Сострадание	Compassion
Curiosity	Curiosity	Любопытство	Curiosity
Calm	Calm	Спокойствие	Calm
Connectedness	Connectedness	Связность	Connectedness
Confidence	Confidence	Уверенность	Confidence
Courage	Courage	Храбрость	Courage
Clarity	Clarity	Ясность	Clarity
Creativity	Creativity	Креативность	Creativity
CHAPTER 5	CHAPTER 5	ГЛАВА 5	CHAPTER 5
Be With	Be With	Быть с	Be With
Encouraging Parts to Separate from You	Encouraging Parts to Separate from You	Поощрение частей отделиться от вас	Encouraging Parts to Separate from You
I can’t catch my breath. The pain in my chest is excruciating. It feels like someone is taking a sledgehammer to my ribcage from the inside and also like my heart is in a vise grip. I’m certain I will pass out. If I don’t die from falling and hitting my head on the shower tile, this pain in my chest will take me out. The more I try to breathe, the tighter the grip on my heart. I’m sweating profusely. The pace of my heartbeat reaches a dizzying speed that causes nausea. I start to believe this is how my life ends, here in the shower, naked and defenseless. My brain tells me to call out to my husband for help, but trying to speak is met with a twisting chest pain that steals my words. The hot steam of the shower is suffocating. I am immobilized except for the tears flowing down my face. My internal temperature skyrockets, and the dizziness intensifies. The inevitable is about to happen. I hold the shower wall to steady myself. Just before I pass out, a thought flashes, “You’ve experienced this before. Panic. You’re not going to pass out or die. This is a panic attack.”	I can’t catch my breath. The pain in my chest is excruciating. It feels like someone is taking a sledgehammer to my ribcage from the inside and also like my heart is in a vise grip. I’m certain I will pass out. If I don’t die from falling and hitting my head on the shower tile, this pain in my chest will take me out. The more I try to breathe, the tighter the grip on my heart. I’m sweating profusely. The pace of my heartbeat reaches a dizzying speed that causes nausea. I start to believe this is how my life ends, here in the shower, naked and defenseless. My brain tells me to call out to my husband for help, but trying to speak is met with a twisting chest pain that steals my words. The hot steam of the shower is suffocating. I am immobilized except for the tears flowing down my face. My internal temperature skyrockets, and the dizziness intensifies. The inevitable is about to happen. I hold the shower wall to steady myself. Just before I pass out, a thought flashes, “You’ve experienced this before. Panic. You’re not going to pass out or die. This is a panic attack.”	Я не могу отдышаться. Боль в груди невыносимая. Такое ощущение, будто кто-то бьет кувалдой по моей грудной клетке изнутри, а также как будто мое сердце зажато в тисках. Я уверен, что потеряю сознание. Если я не умру от падения и удара головой о плитку в душе, эта боль в груди выведет меня из строя. Чем больше я пытаюсь дышать, тем сильнее сжимается мое сердце. Я сильно потею. Скорость моего сердцебиения достигает головокружительной скорости, вызывающей тошноту. Я начинаю верить, что именно так и заканчивается моя жизнь — здесь, в душе, обнаженная и беззащитная. Мой мозг говорит мне позвать мужа на помощь, но попытка заговорить сопровождается скручивающей болью в груди, которая крадет мои слова. Горячий пар душа удушает. Я обездвижен, если не считать слез, текущих по моему лицу. Моя внутренняя температура резко возрастает, а головокружение усиливается. Неизбежное вот-вот произойдет. Я держусь за стенку душа, чтобы устоять. Прежде чем я теряю сознание, у меня мелькает мысль: «Ты уже сталкивался с этим раньше. Паника. Ты не потеряешь сознание и не умрешь. Это паническая атака».	I can’t catch my breath. The pain in my chest is excruciating. It feels like someone is taking a sledgehammer to my ribcage from the inside and also like my heart is in a vise grip. I’m certain I will pass out. If I don’t die from falling and hitting my head on the shower tile, this pain in my chest will take me out. The more I try to breathe, the tighter the grip on my heart. I’m sweating profusely. The pace of my heartbeat reaches a dizzying speed that causes nausea. I start to believe this is how my life ends, here in the shower, naked and defenseless. My brain tells me to call out to my husband for help, but trying to speak is met with a twisting chest pain that steals my words. The hot steam of the shower is suffocating. I am immobilized except for the tears flowing down my face. My internal temperature skyrockets, and the dizziness intensifies. The inevitable is about to happen. I hold the shower wall to steady myself. Just before I pass out, a thought flashes, “You’ve experienced this before. Panic. You’re not going to pass out or die. This is a panic attack.”
I hear a compassionately soft voice say, “I can be with you and support you if you make room for me. Let me be with you.” My body responds with shortness of breath and blurred vision. The voice continues in soft tones of a whisper, “I’m here with you; you’re not alone. You don’t have to do this by yourself.” The voice seems a million miles away, and I desperately want to believe it. As it repeats itself several times, I am able to deepen my inhales and slow my exhales. Each time I do, the voice is clearer and closer. However, the pain in my chest and rapid heartbeat remain the same. My right hand moves to my heart, affirming that I am not alone, which slows my breath further. Next, I hear the voice say, “That’s good, keep with the full breaths.” The panic continues to abate. The voice goes on to say, “I’m with you. You’re okay. Just breathe.”	I hear a compassionately soft voice say, “I can be with you and support you if you make room for me. Let me be with you.” My body responds with shortness of breath and blurred vision. The voice continues in soft tones of a whisper, “I’m here with you; you’re not alone. You don’t have to do this by yourself.” The voice seems a million miles away, and I desperately want to believe it. As it repeats itself several times, I am able to deepen my inhales and slow my exhales. Each time I do, the voice is clearer and closer. However, the pain in my chest and rapid heartbeat remain the same. My right hand moves to my heart, affirming that I am not alone, which slows my breath further. Next, I hear the voice say, “That’s good, keep with the full breaths.” The panic continues to abate. The voice goes on to say, “I’m with you. You’re okay. Just breathe.”	Я слышу сострадательный мягкий голос, говорящий: «Я могу быть с тобой и поддержать тебя, если ты уступишь мне место. Позволь мне быть с тобой». Мое тело реагирует одышкой и помутнением зрения. Голос продолжает мягким шепотом: «Я здесь с тобой; ты не одинок. Вам не обязательно делать это самостоятельно». Кажется, голос находится за миллион миль, и мне отчаянно хочется в это поверить. Поскольку это повторяется несколько раз, я могу углубить вдох и замедлить выдох. С каждым разом голос становится все отчетливее и ближе. Однако боль в груди и учащенное сердцебиение остались прежними. Моя правая рука приближается к сердцу, подтверждая, что я не один, что еще больше замедляет мое дыхание. Затем я слышу, как голос говорит: «Это хорошо, продолжайте дышать полной грудью». Паника продолжает стихать. Голос продолжает говорить: «Я с тобой. Ты в порядке. Просто дыши».	I hear a compassionately soft voice say, “I can be with you and support you if you make room for me. Let me be with you.” My body responds with shortness of breath and blurred vision. The voice continues in soft tones of a whisper, “I’m here with you; you’re not alone. You don’t have to do this by yourself.” The voice seems a million miles away, and I desperately want to believe it. As it repeats itself several times, I am able to deepen my inhales and slow my exhales. Each time I do, the voice is clearer and closer. However, the pain in my chest and rapid heartbeat remain the same. My right hand moves to my heart, affirming that I am not alone, which slows my breath further. Next, I hear the voice say, “That’s good, keep with the full breaths.” The panic continues to abate. The voice goes on to say, “I’m with you. You’re okay. Just breathe.”
Now I (Self) have clarity that I’m speaking with Antsy as she is experiencing sheer panic. Being recognized by me, Antsy turns down the intensity of the chest pain and slightly slows the heartbeat. I (Self) thank Antsy for reducing the intensity of the bodily sensations. My hand remains on my heart as she unblends from me, and I can now be with her.	Now I (Self) have clarity that I’m speaking with Antsy as she is experiencing sheer panic. Being recognized by me, Antsy turns down the intensity of the chest pain and slightly slows the heartbeat. I (Self) thank Antsy for reducing the intensity of the bodily sensations. My hand remains on my heart as she unblends from me, and I can now be with her.	Теперь у меня (Я) есть ясность в том, что я говорю с Энси, поскольку она испытывает настоящую панику. Узнанный мной, Антси снижает интенсивность боли в груди и немного замедляет сердцебиение. Я (Сам) благодарю Antsy за снижение интенсивности телесных ощущений. Моя рука остается на моем сердце, когда она отделяется от меня, и теперь я могу быть с ней.	Now I (Self) have clarity that I’m speaking with Antsy as she is experiencing sheer panic. Being recognized by me, Antsy turns down the intensity of the chest pain and slightly slows the heartbeat. I (Self) thank Antsy for reducing the intensity of the bodily sensations. My hand remains on my heart as she unblends from me, and I can now be with her.
IFS CONCEPT 1: BLENDING	IFS CONCEPT 1: BLENDING	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: СМЕШИВАНИЕ	IFS CONCEPT 1: BLENDING
The way parts embody our systems is called blending. In the experience I’ve just shared, I was blended with Antsy. She took over my system, and her primary expression was in intense bodily sensations of shortness of breath, accelerated heart rate, chest pains, nausea, dizziness, panting, and blurred vision. When blending happens, access to our Self-energy is minimized. The part that is blended is in the seat of consciousness, and we experience the part as ourselves in totality, not as separate from us or a part of us. When Antsy was blended with my Self in this moment, I experienced her as me.	The way parts embody our systems is called blending. In the experience I’ve just shared, I was blended with Antsy. She took over my system, and her primary expression was in intense bodily sensations of shortness of breath, accelerated heart rate, chest pains, nausea, dizziness, panting, and blurred vision. When blending happens, access to our Self-energy is minimized. The part that is blended is in the seat of consciousness, and we experience the part as ourselves in totality, not as separate from us or a part of us. When Antsy was blended with my Self in this moment, I experienced her as me.	Способ, которым части воплощают наши системы, называется смешиванием. В опыте, которым я только что поделился, меня смешали с Antsy. Она взяла на себя управление моей системой, и ее основным проявлением были интенсивные телесные ощущения одышки, учащенного пульса, болей в груди, тошноты, головокружения, одышки и помутнения зрения. Когда происходит смешение, доступ к нашей собственной энергии сводится к минимуму. Смешанная часть находится в месте сознания, и мы воспринимаем эту часть как самих себя во всей полноте, а не как отдельную от нас или как часть нас. Когда в этот момент Анси слилась с моим Я, я ощутил ее как себя.	The way parts embody our systems is called blending. In the experience I’ve just shared, I was blended with Antsy. She took over my system, and her primary expression was in intense bodily sensations of shortness of breath, accelerated heart rate, chest pains, nausea, dizziness, panting, and blurred vision. When blending happens, access to our Self-energy is minimized. The part that is blended is in the seat of consciousness, and we experience the part as ourselves in totality, not as separate from us or a part of us. When Antsy was blended with my Self in this moment, I experienced her as me.
Parts blend with us as a way of communicating. When we are blended, the extreme feelings, thoughts, and beliefs of the part are what we experience. Antsy used my body to express her fear through intense somatic symptoms, which felt like dying.	Parts blend with us as a way of communicating. When we are blended, the extreme feelings, thoughts, and beliefs of the part are what we experience. Antsy used my body to express her fear through intense somatic symptoms, which felt like dying.	Части сливаются с нами как способ общения. Когда мы смешаны, мы испытываем крайние чувства, мысли и убеждения этой части. Энси использовала мое тело, чтобы выразить свой страх через сильные соматические симптомы, которые ощущались как смерть.	Parts blend with us as a way of communicating. When we are blended, the extreme feelings, thoughts, and beliefs of the part are what we experience. Antsy used my body to express her fear through intense somatic symptoms, which felt like dying.
Blending is a way parts express their needs. Although she didn’t come right out and ask for what she needed, Antsy’s fear was an indication of an unmet need. I later came to know she needed safety, connection, and to be understood. In Chapter 6, I talk about how to get to know our parts by befriending them.	Blending is a way parts express their needs. Although she didn’t come right out and ask for what she needed, Antsy’s fear was an indication of an unmet need. I later came to know she needed safety, connection, and to be understood. In Chapter 6, I talk about how to get to know our parts by befriending them.	Смешение — это способ, которым части выражают свои потребности. Хотя она не вышла прямо и не попросила о том, что ей нужно, страх Энси был признаком неудовлетворенной потребности. Позже я понял, что ей нужна безопасность, связь и понимание. В главе 6 я рассказываю о том, как узнать наши части, подружившись с ними.	Blending is a way parts express their needs. Although she didn’t come right out and ask for what she needed, Antsy’s fear was an indication of an unmet need. I later came to know she needed safety, connection, and to be understood. In Chapter 6, I talk about how to get to know our parts by befriending them.
IFS CONCEPT 2: UNBLENDING	IFS CONCEPT 2: UNBLENDING	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: РАЗЪЕДИНЕНИЕ	IFS CONCEPT 2: UNBLENDING
Before we can get to know a part, the part must first unblend. When a part is in the seat of consciousness, we are that part. There is no separation between us and the part. Unblending is how parts create separation. We want parts to separate because this increases Self-energy and allows Self to come into relationship with the part. The part cannot be known if it is alone. The part needs to experience and be supported by Self to be heard, understood, and validated. Unblending allows Self to get to know the part. However, the part must unblend from Self, not the other way around; Self cannot drive the unblending. It must be the part’s choice and the part’s actions that cause unblending to happen. With unblending, the system shifts from being led by the part to Self-leadership.	Before we can get to know a part, the part must first unblend. When a part is in the seat of consciousness, we are that part. There is no separation between us and the part. Unblending is how parts create separation. We want parts to separate because this increases Self-energy and allows Self to come into relationship with the part. The part cannot be known if it is alone. The part needs to experience and be supported by Self to be heard, understood, and validated. Unblending allows Self to get to know the part. However, the part must unblend from Self, not the other way around; Self cannot drive the unblending. It must be the part’s choice and the part’s actions that cause unblending to happen. With unblending, the system shifts from being led by the part to Self-leadership.	Прежде чем мы сможем узнать часть, часть должна сначала рассоединиться. Когда часть находится в месте сознания, мы являемся этой частью. Между нами и частью нет разделения. Растворение — это то, как части создают разделение. Мы хотим, чтобы части разделились, потому что это увеличивает энергию «Я» и позволяет «Я» вступить во взаимоотношения с частью. Часть не может быть познана, если она одна. Эта часть должна получить опыт и поддержку со стороны «Я», чтобы быть услышанной, понятой и подтвержденной. Растворение позволяет «Я» узнать эту часть. Однако часть должна отделиться от Я, а не наоборот; «Я» не может управлять несмешиванием. Это должен быть выбор части и ее действия, которые приводят к неслиянию. При несмешивании система переходит от руководства части к самолидерству.	Before we can get to know a part, the part must first unblend. When a part is in the seat of consciousness, we are that part. There is no separation between us and the part. Unblending is how parts create separation. We want parts to separate because this increases Self-energy and allows Self to come into relationship with the part. The part cannot be known if it is alone. The part needs to experience and be supported by Self to be heard, understood, and validated. Unblending allows Self to get to know the part. However, the part must unblend from Self, not the other way around; Self cannot drive the unblending. It must be the part’s choice and the part’s actions that cause unblending to happen. With unblending, the system shifts from being led by the part to Self-leadership.
In the story I just shared, the unblending process begins with Antsy, when Self reminds her that she has experienced these feelings in the past, names them as a panic attack, and reassures her that she is not going to die. Self goes on to request that Antsy make space for Self to support her so she doesn’t have to be alone. Notice that Antsy doesn’t completely unblend at the first request; she doesn’t need to. Self just needs some separation to happen. Enough space is made that Self can continue to support Antsy by being present and reminding her over and over that she is not alone.	In the story I just shared, the unblending process begins with Antsy, when Self reminds her that she has experienced these feelings in the past, names them as a panic attack, and reassures her that she is not going to die. Self goes on to request that Antsy make space for Self to support her so she doesn’t have to be alone. Notice that Antsy doesn’t completely unblend at the first request; she doesn’t need to. Self just needs some separation to happen. Enough space is made that Self can continue to support Antsy by being present and reminding her over and over that she is not alone.	В истории, которой я только что поделился, процесс разделения начинается с Antsy, когда Селф напоминает ей, что она испытывала эти чувства в прошлом, называет их панической атакой и заверяет ее, что она не умрет. Далее Селф просит, чтобы Энси освободила место для Селфа, чтобы поддержать ее, чтобы ей не приходилось оставаться одной. Обратите внимание, что Antsy не полностью разделяется по первому требованию; ей это не нужно. «Я» просто нужно некоторое разделение, чтобы произошло. Освобождено достаточно места, чтобы Селф мог продолжать поддерживать Анси, присутствуя и снова и снова напоминая ей, что она не одна.	In the story I just shared, the unblending process begins with Antsy, when Self reminds her that she has experienced these feelings in the past, names them as a panic attack, and reassures her that she is not going to die. Self goes on to request that Antsy make space for Self to support her so she doesn’t have to be alone. Notice that Antsy doesn’t completely unblend at the first request; she doesn’t need to. Self just needs some separation to happen. Enough space is made that Self can continue to support Antsy by being present and reminding her over and over that she is not alone.
I have found that my parts respond well to physical connection, so one of the techniques my Self uses to calm my parts when they become dysregulated is touch. To assist Antsy in regulating, Self places its right hand over Antsy’s fast-beating heart, deepening the connection between the two while creating a stabilizing presence for Antsy. The physical connection allows Antsy to slow her heart rate and encourages her to unblend further, giving Self greater presence in the system. Once that happens, Self can support and begin to get to know Antsy, understand the reason for the panic, and address her needs.	I have found that my parts respond well to physical connection, so one of the techniques my Self uses to calm my parts when they become dysregulated is touch. To assist Antsy in regulating, Self places its right hand over Antsy’s fast-beating heart, deepening the connection between the two while creating a stabilizing presence for Antsy. The physical connection allows Antsy to slow her heart rate and encourages her to unblend further, giving Self greater presence in the system. Once that happens, Self can support and begin to get to know Antsy, understand the reason for the panic, and address her needs.	Я обнаружил, что мои части хорошо реагируют на физическое соединение, поэтому один из методов, которые мое Я использует, чтобы успокоить мои части, когда они теряют регуляцию, — это прикосновение. Чтобы помочь Антси в регулировании, Селф кладет правую руку на быстро бьющееся сердце Антси, углубляя связь между ними и создавая стабилизирующее присутствие Антси. Физическая связь позволяет Энси замедлить частоту сердечных сокращений и побуждает ее еще больше расслабиться, что дает Селф большее присутствие в системе. Как только это произойдет, Селф сможет поддержать Анси и начать знакомиться с ней, понять причину паники и удовлетворить ее потребности.	I have found that my parts respond well to physical connection, so one of the techniques my Self uses to calm my parts when they become dysregulated is touch. To assist Antsy in regulating, Self places its right hand over Antsy’s fast-beating heart, deepening the connection between the two while creating a stabilizing presence for Antsy. The physical connection allows Antsy to slow her heart rate and encourages her to unblend further, giving Self greater presence in the system. Once that happens, Self can support and begin to get to know Antsy, understand the reason for the panic, and address her needs.
IFS CONCEPT 3: WHEN A PART DOESN’T UNBLEND	IFS CONCEPT 3: WHEN A PART DOESN’T UNBLEND	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 3: КОГДА ЧАСТЬ НЕ РАЗЪЕДИНЯЕТСЯ	IFS CONCEPT 3: WHEN A PART DOESN’T UNBLEND
Some parts have a difficult time unblending. Even Antsy unblended only partially at first; her breathing slowed while her chest pains and rapid heartbeat persisted. However, there was enough separation for her to have awareness of Self. If Antsy had not responded to Self’s support to unblend, that would have alerted Self that while gripped in a terrifying experience, Antsy was also afraid to separate. Self would have asked her, “What are you afraid would happen if you separated?” The primary fear parts have about separating is that I will somehow be harmed or something worse than what they are doing (in this case causing a panic attack) will happen to me. The parts’ job is to keep me safe. If a part is afraid of losing its job, we first want to validate its importance in the system, then let the part know that we are not trying to get rid of it but want to get to know it, emphasizing that we cannot get to know it unless it allows us to be with it.	Some parts have a difficult time unblending. Even Antsy unblended only partially at first; her breathing slowed while her chest pains and rapid heartbeat persisted. However, there was enough separation for her to have awareness of Self. If Antsy had not responded to Self’s support to unblend, that would have alerted Self that while gripped in a terrifying experience, Antsy was also afraid to separate. Self would have asked her, “What are you afraid would happen if you separated?” The primary fear parts have about separating is that I will somehow be harmed or something worse than what they are doing (in this case causing a panic attack) will happen to me. The parts’ job is to keep me safe. If a part is afraid of losing its job, we first want to validate its importance in the system, then let the part know that we are not trying to get rid of it but want to get to know it, emphasizing that we cannot get to know it unless it allows us to be with it.	Некоторые части трудно разъединить. Даже Antsy поначалу разделился лишь частично; ее дыхание замедлилось, но боли в груди и учащенное сердцебиение сохранялись. Однако ей было достаточно разделения, чтобы осознать Себя. Если бы Энси не отреагировал на поддержку Селфа в разделении, это насторожило бы Селфа, что, несмотря на ужасающий опыт, Антси также боится отделиться. Селф спросил бы ее: «Чего ты боишься, если бы вы расстались?» Основной страх, который части испытывают по поводу разделения, заключается в том, что мне каким-то образом причинят вред или что со мной случится что-то худшее, чем то, что они делают (в данном случае вызывающее паническую атаку). Задача частей — обеспечить мою безопасность. Если часть боится потерять свою работу, мы сначала хотим подтвердить ее важность в системе, а затем дать понять части, что мы не пытаемся избавиться от нее, а хотим с ней познакомиться, подчеркивая, что мы не можем добраться до нее. знать это, если только это не позволяет нам быть с ним.	Some parts have a difficult time unblending. Even Antsy unblended only partially at first; her breathing slowed while her chest pains and rapid heartbeat persisted. However, there was enough separation for her to have awareness of Self. If Antsy had not responded to Self’s support to unblend, that would have alerted Self that while gripped in a terrifying experience, Antsy was also afraid to separate. Self would have asked her, “What are you afraid would happen if you separated?” The primary fear parts have about separating is that I will somehow be harmed or something worse than what they are doing (in this case causing a panic attack) will happen to me. The parts’ job is to keep me safe. If a part is afraid of losing its job, we first want to validate its importance in the system, then let the part know that we are not trying to get rid of it but want to get to know it, emphasizing that we cannot get to know it unless it allows us to be with it.
Protectors are diligent in their roles and do not want the system to experience the pain of the vulnerable parts they protect. They fear that if they separate, we will feel the intense feelings of worthlessness, not being good enough, or shame. If this is the part’s fear, Self can ask the vulnerable part not to overwhelm the system with its intense feelings and beliefs while Self is getting to know it, and if the vulnerable part does express with intensity, Self can let the part know that Self only needs to experience a small amount of what it’s feeling in order to understand. The main messages in addressing the protector’s fears are that the protector controls the process, and it can come back to protect at any time. Letting the protector know that Self is not trying to change it or get rid of it allows it to relax and increases its willingness to unblend.	Protectors are diligent in their roles and do not want the system to experience the pain of the vulnerable parts they protect. They fear that if they separate, we will feel the intense feelings of worthlessness, not being good enough, or shame. If this is the part’s fear, Self can ask the vulnerable part not to overwhelm the system with its intense feelings and beliefs while Self is getting to know it, and if the vulnerable part does express with intensity, Self can let the part know that Self only needs to experience a small amount of what it’s feeling in order to understand. The main messages in addressing the protector’s fears are that the protector controls the process, and it can come back to protect at any time. Letting the protector know that Self is not trying to change it or get rid of it allows it to relax and increases its willingness to unblend.	Защитники добросовестно выполняют свою роль и не хотят, чтобы система испытывала боль от уязвимых частей, которые они защищают. Они боятся, что, если они расстанутся, мы испытаем сильное чувство никчемности, недостаточной доброты или стыда. Если это страх части, «Я» может попросить уязвимую часть не перегружать систему своими сильными чувствами и убеждениями, пока «Я» знакомится с ней, и если уязвимая часть действительно выражает это с интенсивностью, «Я» может дать части знать, что «Я» ему нужно лишь немного испытать то, что он чувствует, чтобы понять. Основные идеи в борьбе со страхами защитника заключаются в том, что защитник контролирует процесс и может вернуться, чтобы защитить в любой момент. Если дать защитнику понять, что «Я» не пытается его изменить или избавиться от него, это позволит ему расслабиться и усилит его готовность расстаться.	Protectors are diligent in their roles and do not want the system to experience the pain of the vulnerable parts they protect. They fear that if they separate, we will feel the intense feelings of worthlessness, not being good enough, or shame. If this is the part’s fear, Self can ask the vulnerable part not to overwhelm the system with its intense feelings and beliefs while Self is getting to know it, and if the vulnerable part does express with intensity, Self can let the part know that Self only needs to experience a small amount of what it’s feeling in order to understand. The main messages in addressing the protector’s fears are that the protector controls the process, and it can come back to protect at any time. Letting the protector know that Self is not trying to change it or get rid of it allows it to relax and increases its willingness to unblend.
When the part’s fears are sufficiently addressed and the part unblends, Self can notice any changes in thoughts, beliefs, emotions, and/or bodily sensations. Sometimes as our parts give space, the way they express themselves changes. In the opening story, Antsy’s activation calmed more and more as her fear of dying was attended to. Acknowledge the change, and if the change provides relief, offer gratitude. Once the part unblends, let it know that you want to understand its experiences and get to know it better.	When the part’s fears are sufficiently addressed and the part unblends, Self can notice any changes in thoughts, beliefs, emotions, and/or bodily sensations. Sometimes as our parts give space, the way they express themselves changes. In the opening story, Antsy’s activation calmed more and more as her fear of dying was attended to. Acknowledge the change, and if the change provides relief, offer gratitude. Once the part unblends, let it know that you want to understand its experiences and get to know it better.	Когда страхи части достаточно устранены и часть растворяется, «Я» может заметить любые изменения в мыслях, убеждениях, эмоциях и/или телесных ощущениях. Иногда, когда наши части дают пространство, меняется способ их самовыражения. Во вступительной истории активация Антси все больше и больше успокаивалась по мере того, как ее страх смерти был устранен. Признайте изменение, и если оно принесет облегчение, выразите благодарность. Как только часть распадется, дайте ей понять, что вы хотите понять ее переживания и узнать ее получше.	When the part’s fears are sufficiently addressed and the part unblends, Self can notice any changes in thoughts, beliefs, emotions, and/or bodily sensations. Sometimes as our parts give space, the way they express themselves changes. In the opening story, Antsy’s activation calmed more and more as her fear of dying was attended to. Acknowledge the change, and if the change provides relief, offer gratitude. Once the part unblends, let it know that you want to understand its experiences and get to know it better.
When parts are blended, they believe they are you. They have no awareness of a Self who can support them and handle what they believe you cannot. The key to helping our parts is assisting them to unblend. Self cannot make a part unblend; that is the part’s choice, but Self can encourage the process. Parts are usually willing to unblend after they experience some quality of Self-energy. When the part separates, Self can be with the part. When parts refuse to separate, exploring and addressing their fears related to unblending is necessary. Until their fears are adequately addressed, parts will not feel safe enough to unblend.	When parts are blended, they believe they are you. They have no awareness of a Self who can support them and handle what they believe you cannot. The key to helping our parts is assisting them to unblend. Self cannot make a part unblend; that is the part’s choice, but Self can encourage the process. Parts are usually willing to unblend after they experience some quality of Self-energy. When the part separates, Self can be with the part. When parts refuse to separate, exploring and addressing their fears related to unblending is necessary. Until their fears are adequately addressed, parts will not feel safe enough to unblend.	Когда части смешиваются, они верят, что они — это вы. Они не осознают Я, которое может поддержать их и справиться с тем, с чем, по их мнению, вы не можете справиться. Ключ к помощи нашим частям — помочь им рассоединиться. «Я» не может заставить часть соединиться; это выбор части, но «Я» может стимулировать этот процесс. Части обычно готовы рассоединиться после того, как они испытают некоторое качество Само-энергии. Когда часть отделяется, Я может быть с этой частью. Когда части отказываются разделяться, необходимо изучить и устранить их страхи, связанные с разъединением. Пока их страхи не будут адекватно устранены, части не будут чувствовать себя в достаточной безопасности, чтобы разделиться.	When parts are blended, they believe they are you. They have no awareness of a Self who can support them and handle what they believe you cannot. The key to helping our parts is assisting them to unblend. Self cannot make a part unblend; that is the part’s choice, but Self can encourage the process. Parts are usually willing to unblend after they experience some quality of Self-energy. When the part separates, Self can be with the part. When parts refuse to separate, exploring and addressing their fears related to unblending is necessary. Until their fears are adequately addressed, parts will not feel safe enough to unblend.
Meditation: Be With	Meditation: Be With	Медитация: Будь с	Meditation: Be With
Note: This is a meditation created without the direct assistance of my ancestors.	Note: This is a meditation created without the direct assistance of my ancestors.	Примечание: эта медитация создана без непосредственной помощи моих предков.	Note: This is a meditation created without the direct assistance of my ancestors.
The Be With meditation highlights the importance of parts unblending as essential to building relationship with parts and healing them. It also shows how being aware of what it’s like in our system when we’re blended with a part, versus when we’re not, builds trust between Self and parts as parts get to experience being known by Self and knowing Self.	The Be With meditation highlights the importance of parts unblending as essential to building relationship with parts and healing them. It also shows how being aware of what it’s like in our system when we’re blended with a part, versus when we’re not, builds trust between Self and parts as parts get to experience being known by Self and knowing Self.	Медитация «Быть ​​с» подчеркивает важность разделения частей как необходимого для построения отношений с частями и их исцеления. Это также показывает, как осознание того, что происходит в нашей системе, когда мы смешаны с частью, а не когда мы не смешаны, укрепляет доверие между «Я» и частями, поскольку части получают опыт того, что они познаны «Я» и познают «Я».	The Be With meditation highlights the importance of parts unblending as essential to building relationship with parts and healing them. It also shows how being aware of what it’s like in our system when we’re blended with a part, versus when we’re not, builds trust between Self and parts as parts get to experience being known by Self and knowing Self.
This meditation allows you to experience being blended, unblending, and experiencing the difference between being a part and being with a part.	This meditation allows you to experience being blended, unblending, and experiencing the difference between being a part and being with a part.	Эта медитация позволяет вам ощутить слияние и расслоение, а также почувствовать разницу между тем, чтобы быть частью и быть с частью.	This meditation allows you to experience being blended, unblending, and experiencing the difference between being a part and being with a part.
Take a moment to get comfortable.	Take a moment to get comfortable.	Найдите минутку, чтобы почувствовать себя комфортно.	Take a moment to get comfortable.
Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Закройте глаза или смягчите взгляд.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.
Take note of your breath.	Take note of your breath.	Обратите внимание на свое дыхание.	Take note of your breath.
As you breathe, allow your awareness to follow the breath.	As you breathe, allow your awareness to follow the breath.	Когда вы дышите, позвольте своему сознанию следовать за дыханием.	As you breathe, allow your awareness to follow the breath.
Continue to follow your breath to help you settle.	Continue to follow your breath to help you settle.	Продолжайте следить за своим дыханием, чтобы успокоиться.	Continue to follow your breath to help you settle.
Bring to mind a situation that recently activated one of your parts.	Bring to mind a situation that recently activated one of your parts.	Вспомните ситуацию, которая недавно активировала одну из ваших частей.	Bring to mind a situation that recently activated one of your parts.
It could be a disagreement you had with someone, a situation that caused annoyance, disbelief, anger, or anything else.	It could be a disagreement you had with someone, a situation that caused annoyance, disbelief, anger, or anything else.	Это может быть разногласие с кем-то, ситуация, вызвавшая раздражение, недоверие, гнев или что-то еще.	It could be a disagreement you had with someone, a situation that caused annoyance, disbelief, anger, or anything else.
Allow the part to embody as if the situation is occurring now.	Allow the part to embody as if the situation is occurring now.	Позвольте этой части воплотиться так, как будто ситуация происходит сейчас.	Allow the part to embody as if the situation is occurring now.
What do you notice?	What do you notice?	Что вы заметили?	What do you notice?
What emotions are you experiencing?	What emotions are you experiencing?	Какие эмоции вы испытываете?	What emotions are you experiencing?
What bodily sensations are present?	What bodily sensations are present?	Какие телесные ощущения присутствуют?	What bodily sensations are present?
What are you saying?	What are you saying?	Что вы говорите?	What are you saying?
What do you believe about the situation or person?	What do you believe about the situation or person?	Что вы думаете о ситуации или человеке?	What do you believe about the situation or person?
What are your thoughts?	What are your thoughts?	Каковы ваши мысли?	What are your thoughts?
Let whatever is coming up completely embody you, and stay with what you’re experiencing.	Let whatever is coming up completely embody you, and stay with what you’re experiencing.	Позвольте всему, что происходит, полностью воплотить вас и оставайтесь с тем, что вы испытываете.	Let whatever is coming up completely embody you, and stay with what you’re experiencing.
Ask the part to separate from you. It can do so by:	Ask the part to separate from you. It can do so by:	Попросите часть отделиться от вас. Это может быть сделано путем:	Ask the part to separate from you. It can do so by:
Stepping outside of you slightly.	Stepping outside of you slightly.	Немного выйдя за пределы тебя.	Stepping outside of you slightly.
Sitting next to you.	Sitting next to you.	Сидя рядом с тобой.	Sitting next to you.
Decreasing its emotions.	Decreasing its emotions.	Уменьшение своих эмоций.	Decreasing its emotions.
Turning down the intensity of body sensations.	Turning down the intensity of body sensations.	Уменьшение интенсивности телесных ощущений.	Turning down the intensity of body sensations.
If the part unblends, notice what it feels likes to be separate from the part.	If the part unblends, notice what it feels likes to be separate from the part.	Если часть распадается, обратите внимание на то, каково это быть отделенным от части.	If the part unblends, notice what it feels likes to be separate from the part.
Just be with the part in this separate and connected state.	Just be with the part in this separate and connected state.	Просто будьте с частью в этом отдельном и связанном состоянии.	Just be with the part in this separate and connected state.
If the part does not unblend, ask, “What are you afraid will happen if you separate?”	If the part does not unblend, ask, “What are you afraid will happen if you separate?”	Если часть не разделяется, спросите: «Чего вы боитесь, если вы разделитесь?»	If the part does not unblend, ask, “What are you afraid will happen if you separate?”
Listen to the part’s fears.	Listen to the part’s fears.	Прислушайтесь к страхам части.	Listen to the part’s fears.
Address any fears the part shares with you.	Address any fears the part shares with you.	Устраните любые страхи, которые часть разделяет с вами.	Address any fears the part shares with you.
After addressing the part’s fears, ask it to separate now.	After addressing the part’s fears, ask it to separate now.	Разобравшись со страхами части, попросите ее отделиться прямо сейчас.	After addressing the part’s fears, ask it to separate now.
If it separates now, notice what you feel.	If it separates now, notice what you feel.	Если он сейчас отделится, обратите внимание на то, что вы чувствуете.	If it separates now, notice what you feel.
If it still doesn’t unblend, continue to identify and address its fears.	If it still doesn’t unblend, continue to identify and address its fears.	Если он все еще не расстается, продолжайте выявлять его страхи и устранять их.	If it still doesn’t unblend, continue to identify and address its fears.
If your part did unblend, continue to be with the part.	If your part did unblend, continue to be with the part.	Если ваша часть распалась, продолжайте быть с ней.	If your part did unblend, continue to be with the part.
Take note of the difference between the part being blended and now unblended.	Take note of the difference between the part being blended and now unblended.	Обратите внимание на разницу между частью, которую смешивают, и частью, которую теперь не смешивают.	Take note of the difference between the part being blended and now unblended.
How do you feel toward the part in this unblended state?	How do you feel toward the part in this unblended state?	Как вы относитесь к роли в этом несмешанном состоянии?	How do you feel toward the part in this unblended state?
If you feel one of the qualities of Self-energy, send that energy to the part.	If you feel one of the qualities of Self-energy, send that energy to the part.	Если вы чувствуете одно из качеств Само-энергии, направьте эту энергию в эту часть.	If you feel one of the qualities of Self-energy, send that energy to the part.
How does the part respond to the Self-energy?	How does the part respond to the Self-energy?	Как эта часть реагирует на собственную энергию?	How does the part respond to the Self-energy?
Set an intention to come back to your part at a later time.	Set an intention to come back to your part at a later time.	Установите намерение вернуться к своей части позже.	Set an intention to come back to your part at a later time.
Thank your part. If it was able to separate, thank it for doing so.	Thank your part. If it was able to separate, thank it for doing so.	Спасибо с вашей стороны. Если он смог отделиться, поблагодарите его за это.	Thank your part. If it was able to separate, thank it for doing so.
If it was not able to separate, thank it for sharing its fears with you.	If it was not able to separate, thank it for sharing its fears with you.	Если он не смог отделиться, поблагодарите его за то, что он поделился с вами своими страхами.	If it was not able to separate, thank it for sharing its fears with you.
Bring your awareness to your breath, and when it feels right, re-enter this moment and space by slowly opening your eyes when you’re ready.	Bring your awareness to your breath, and when it feels right, re-enter this moment and space by slowly opening your eyes when you’re ready.	Сосредоточьте свое внимание на своем дыхании, и, когда оно почувствует себя нужным, снова войдите в этот момент и пространство, медленно открывая глаза, когда будете готовы.	Bring your awareness to your breath, and when it feels right, re-enter this moment and space by slowly opening your eyes when you’re ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: Be With Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Be With Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Будьте с вопросами журнала	Exercise 2: Be With Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Be With meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Be With meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили медитацию «Быть ​​с» и написали свой быстрый дневник, потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, отвечая на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Be With meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
Describe the activating situation or person.	Describe the activating situation or person.	Опишите активирующую ситуацию или человека.	Describe the activating situation or person.
What was your experience of being blended with your part? Emotions	What was your experience of being blended with your part? Emotions	Каков был ваш опыт слияния со своей ролью? Эмоции	What was your experience of being blended with your part? Emotions
Bodily sensations	Bodily sensations	Телесные ощущения	Bodily sensations
What the part said	What the part said	Что сказала часть	What the part said
Beliefs	Beliefs	Убеждения	Beliefs
Thoughts	Thoughts	Мысли	Thoughts
Anything else	Anything else	Что-нибудь еще	Anything else
How did your part respond to being asked to unblend?	How did your part respond to being asked to unblend?	Как ваша часть отреагировала на просьбу разделиться?	How did your part respond to being asked to unblend?
If your part did unblend, what did you experience after it separated from you?	If your part did unblend, what did you experience after it separated from you?	Если ваша часть разделилась, что вы испытали после того, как она отделилась от вас?	If your part did unblend, what did you experience after it separated from you?
If your part did not unblend, what were its fears?	If your part did not unblend, what were its fears?	Если ваша часть не разделилась, чего она опасалась?	If your part did not unblend, what were its fears?
How did your part respond to Self-energy?	How did your part respond to Self-energy?	Как ваша часть отреагировала на Самоэнергию?	How did your part respond to Self-energy?
What intentions did you set with your part?	What intentions did you set with your part?	Какие намерения вы поставили перед собой?	What intentions did you set with your part?
Exercise 3: Activation Practice	Exercise 3: Activation Practice	Упражнение 3: Практика активации	Exercise 3: Activation Practice
This exercise helps to notice parts in real time and to unblend them in the moments of activation. Being with parts will assist in developing relationship and trust between them and Self.	This exercise helps to notice parts in real time and to unblend them in the moments of activation. Being with parts will assist in developing relationship and trust between them and Self.	Это упражнение помогает замечать части в реальном времени и разъединять их в моменты активации. Общение с частями поможет развитию отношений и доверия между ними и Собой.	This exercise helps to notice parts in real time and to unblend them in the moments of activation. Being with parts will assist in developing relationship and trust between them and Self.
Over the next week, check in with the part from the meditation daily.	Over the next week, check in with the part from the meditation daily.	В течение следующей недели ежедневно проверяйте часть медитации.	Over the next week, check in with the part from the meditation daily.
Pay attention to when this part is present.	Pay attention to when this part is present.	Обратите внимание, когда эта часть присутствует.	Pay attention to when this part is present.
Track the situations and/or people that activate this part in your daily life.	Track the situations and/or people that activate this part in your daily life.	Отслеживайте ситуации и/или людей, которые активируют эту часть вашей повседневной жизни.	Track the situations and/or people that activate this part in your daily life.
When this part is present, ask it to unblend so you can be with it in its activation.	When this part is present, ask it to unblend so you can be with it in its activation.	Когда эта часть присутствует, попросите ее рассоединиться, чтобы вы могли быть с ней в ее активации.	When this part is present, ask it to unblend so you can be with it in its activation.
Journal about your experience with this part daily and what you learned.	Journal about your experience with this part daily and what you learned.	Ежедневно записывайте свой опыт работы с этой частью и то, что вы узнали.	Journal about your experience with this part daily and what you learned.
CHAPTER 6	CHAPTER 6	ГЛАВА 6	CHAPTER 6
Crystal Cave with the Ancestors	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors	Хрустальная пещера с предками	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors
Building Relationships with Your Parts	Building Relationships with Your Parts	Построение отношений с вашими частями	Building Relationships with Your Parts
In the last chapter, we met my part Antsy. We learned of her struggle to unblend, as she thought she was alone and had no awareness of Self. She was eventually able to unblend, and now we pick up her story from her separated state as Self befriends her.	In the last chapter, we met my part Antsy. We learned of her struggle to unblend, as she thought she was alone and had no awareness of Self. She was eventually able to unblend, and now we pick up her story from her separated state as Self befriends her.	В последней главе мы встретили мою роль Анси. Мы узнали о ее борьбе за то, чтобы отделиться, поскольку она думала, что одинока и не осознает себя. В конце концов она смогла расстаться, и теперь мы продолжаем ее историю из ее разделенного состояния, когда Селф подружился с ней.	In the last chapter, we met my part Antsy. We learned of her struggle to unblend, as she thought she was alone and had no awareness of Self. She was eventually able to unblend, and now we pick up her story from her separated state as Self befriends her.
The first thing I do after Antsy unblends is extend compassion toward her. I want her to experience what I feel for her. I extend curiosity too, because I am genuinely interested in the root of her panicked state. I begin to deepen our connection by silently being with Antsy, with my hand on my heart, allowing her to feel my presence with her.	The first thing I do after Antsy unblends is extend compassion toward her. I want her to experience what I feel for her. I extend curiosity too, because I am genuinely interested in the root of her panicked state. I begin to deepen our connection by silently being with Antsy, with my hand on my heart, allowing her to feel my presence with her.	Первое, что я делаю после того, как Антси рассталась, — это сочувствую ей. Я хочу, чтобы она испытала то, что я к ней чувствую. Я также проявляю любопытство, потому что меня искренне интересует причина ее панического состояния. Я начинаю углублять нашу связь, молча находясь с Энси, положив руку на сердце, позволяя ей чувствовать мое присутствие с ней.	The first thing I do after Antsy unblends is extend compassion toward her. I want her to experience what I feel for her. I extend curiosity too, because I am genuinely interested in the root of her panicked state. I begin to deepen our connection by silently being with Antsy, with my hand on my heart, allowing her to feel my presence with her.
Compassionately I ask, “What’s causing you panic right now?” Antsy responds, “It’s terrifying to get everything I’ve always wanted. I’m terrified. This is so scary for me.” A torrent of Antsy’s tears streams down my face with this revelation. I experience it as an emotional release of what she has been holding as she acknowledges her terror out loud. I tell Antsy that she doesn’t have to be alone in her fear. I reassure her that I am with her and will not leave her. I reassure her that she doesn’t have to do anything. I can be with her and handle what terrifies her. I assure her that if she remains separate from me like she is right now in the face of what scares her, I can support her as she moves forward. She responds with an audible sigh, which causes my body to relax even more. The chest pain, although still present, lessens, and the fast heartbeat and grip are less intense. She says, “I didn’t know you were here. I thought I had to handle what comes next by myself.”	Compassionately I ask, “What’s causing you panic right now?” Antsy responds, “It’s terrifying to get everything I’ve always wanted. I’m terrified. This is so scary for me.” A torrent of Antsy’s tears streams down my face with this revelation. I experience it as an emotional release of what she has been holding as she acknowledges her terror out loud. I tell Antsy that she doesn’t have to be alone in her fear. I reassure her that I am with her and will not leave her. I reassure her that she doesn’t have to do anything. I can be with her and handle what terrifies her. I assure her that if she remains separate from me like she is right now in the face of what scares her, I can support her as she moves forward. She responds with an audible sigh, which causes my body to relax even more. The chest pain, although still present, lessens, and the fast heartbeat and grip are less intense. She says, “I didn’t know you were here. I thought I had to handle what comes next by myself.”	Я сочувственно спрашиваю: «Что вызывает у вас сейчас панику?» Энси отвечает: «Ужасно получить все, что я всегда хотел. Я в ужасе. Это так страшно для меня». При этом откровении по моему лицу текут потоки слез Анси. Я переживаю это как эмоциональное освобождение от того, что она держала в себе, когда она вслух признает свой ужас. Я говорю Энси, что ей не обязательно оставаться одной в своем страхе. Я успокаиваю ее, что я с ней и не оставлю ее. Я успокаиваю ее, что ей не нужно ничего делать. Я могу быть с ней и справиться с тем, что ее пугает. Я уверяю ее, что если она останется отдельно от меня, как сейчас, перед лицом того, что ее пугает, я смогу поддержать ее в ее движении вперед. Она отвечает громким вздохом, отчего мое тело расслабляется еще больше. Боль в груди, хотя и присутствует, уменьшается, а учащенное сердцебиение и хватка становятся менее интенсивными. Она говорит: «Я не знала, что ты здесь. Я думал, что мне придется справиться с тем, что будет дальше, самому».	Compassionately I ask, “What’s causing you panic right now?” Antsy responds, “It’s terrifying to get everything I’ve always wanted. I’m terrified. This is so scary for me.” A torrent of Antsy’s tears streams down my face with this revelation. I experience it as an emotional release of what she has been holding as she acknowledges her terror out loud. I tell Antsy that she doesn’t have to be alone in her fear. I reassure her that I am with her and will not leave her. I reassure her that she doesn’t have to do anything. I can be with her and handle what terrifies her. I assure her that if she remains separate from me like she is right now in the face of what scares her, I can support her as she moves forward. She responds with an audible sigh, which causes my body to relax even more. The chest pain, although still present, lessens, and the fast heartbeat and grip are less intense. She says, “I didn’t know you were here. I thought I had to handle what comes next by myself.”
Antsy reminds me of the significant achievements I’ve accomplished in the past two years. The last two of my five children were launched. My husband and I embarked on a dream, seven years in the making, of becoming permanent international travelers. I achieved the goal of becoming an IFS Solo lead trainer after a five-year process, and I signed a contract with Hay House for the publication of this book.	Antsy reminds me of the significant achievements I’ve accomplished in the past two years. The last two of my five children were launched. My husband and I embarked on a dream, seven years in the making, of becoming permanent international travelers. I achieved the goal of becoming an IFS Solo lead trainer after a five-year process, and I signed a contract with Hay House for the publication of this book.	Antsy напоминает мне о значительных достижениях, которых я достиг за последние два года. Последние двое из моих пяти детей были выпущены на воду. Мы с мужем осуществили семилетнюю мечту — стать постоянными путешественниками за границу. После пятилетнего процесса я достиг цели стать ведущим тренером IFS Solo и подписал контракт с Hay House на публикацию этой книги.	Antsy reminds me of the significant achievements I’ve accomplished in the past two years. The last two of my five children were launched. My husband and I embarked on a dream, seven years in the making, of becoming permanent international travelers. I achieved the goal of becoming an IFS Solo lead trainer after a five-year process, and I signed a contract with Hay House for the publication of this book.
“All of this goodness reminds me of the fear I felt when graduating from college with plans to pursue a master’s degree in social work,” Antsy tells me. “Do you remember how scary that was?”	“All of this goodness reminds me of the fear I felt when graduating from college with plans to pursue a master’s degree in social work,” Antsy tells me. “Do you remember how scary that was?”	«Вся эта доброта напоминает мне о страхе, который я испытывал, когда заканчивал колледж и планировал получить степень магистра в области социальной работы», — говорит мне Антси. — Ты помнишь, как это было страшно?	“All of this goodness reminds me of the fear I felt when graduating from college with plans to pursue a master’s degree in social work,” Antsy tells me. “Do you remember how scary that was?”
“Yes, I do remember your panic back then. What’s the connection between now and then?”	“Yes, I do remember your panic back then. What’s the connection between now and then?”	«Да, я помню твою тогдашнюю панику. Какая связь между сейчас и тогда?»	“Yes, I do remember your panic back then. What’s the connection between now and then?”
“I want you to be successful. I want you to fulfill your dreams and goals, and it scares me when you do.”	“I want you to be successful. I want you to fulfill your dreams and goals, and it scares me when you do.”	«Я хочу, чтобы ты добился успеха. Я хочу, чтобы ты осуществил свои мечты и цели, и меня пугает, когда ты это делаешь».	“I want you to be successful. I want you to fulfill your dreams and goals, and it scares me when you do.”
“I’m not sure I’m understanding the connection between wanting me to succeed and getting fearful when I do.”	“I’m not sure I’m understanding the connection between wanting me to succeed and getting fearful when I do.”	«Я не уверен, что понимаю связь между желанием добиться успеха и страхом, когда я это делаю».	“I’m not sure I’m understanding the connection between wanting me to succeed and getting fearful when I do.”
Antsy takes a deep breath in and lets out a loud sigh. “I cause you to feel anxious when we begin a goal. I do this because I want to push you to get what you set out to achieve. I want to motivate you to stay on track, to not stop. The anxiety is there so you don’t lose sight of what you want.”	Antsy takes a deep breath in and lets out a loud sigh. “I cause you to feel anxious when we begin a goal. I do this because I want to push you to get what you set out to achieve. I want to motivate you to stay on track, to not stop. The anxiety is there so you don’t lose sight of what you want.”	Энси глубоко вздыхает и громко вздыхает. «Я заставляю вас чувствовать беспокойство, когда мы приступаем к достижению цели. Я делаю это, потому что хочу подтолкнуть вас к достижению того, чего вы намеревались достичь. Я хочу мотивировать вас оставаться на правильном пути и не останавливаться. Тревога присутствует, поэтому вы не упускаете из виду то, чего хотите».	Antsy takes a deep breath in and lets out a loud sigh. “I cause you to feel anxious when we begin a goal. I do this because I want to push you to get what you set out to achieve. I want to motivate you to stay on track, to not stop. The anxiety is there so you don’t lose sight of what you want.”
Nodding, I say, “It sounds like you become invested in my goal and work hard to support me in getting there.”	Nodding, I say, “It sounds like you become invested in my goal and work hard to support me in getting there.”	Кивнув, я говорю: «Похоже, что ты увлекся моей целью и усердно работаешь, чтобы поддержать меня в ее достижении».	Nodding, I say, “It sounds like you become invested in my goal and work hard to support me in getting there.”
“Yeah, but when you achieve many things at once, I become overwhelmed and panicky, like now. I worry that you’re reaching for too much and you’ll fail. I panic because I’m terrified of your failure. My job is to help you achieve.”	“Yeah, but when you achieve many things at once, I become overwhelmed and panicky, like now. I worry that you’re reaching for too much and you’ll fail. I panic because I’m terrified of your failure. My job is to help you achieve.”	«Да, но когда ты добиваешься многого одновременно, я становлюсь подавленным и паникую, как сейчас. Я беспокоюсь, что вы стремитесь к слишком многому и потерпите неудачу. Я паникую, потому что боюсь твоей неудачи. Моя задача – помочь вам добиться успеха».	“Yeah, but when you achieve many things at once, I become overwhelmed and panicky, like now. I worry that you’re reaching for too much and you’ll fail. I panic because I’m terrified of your failure. My job is to help you achieve.”
When Antsy shares this, I feel the emotion of another part coming to the surface. Tears well in my eyes. This other part is the exile that Antsy protects by keeping busy helping me achieve. I turn my attention calmly to the exile and say, “I feel you here. I promise I’ll come back and talk with you. Can you relax back and allow space for me to spend more time with Antsy?” I feel the desperation of this little one as it softens back.	When Antsy shares this, I feel the emotion of another part coming to the surface. Tears well in my eyes. This other part is the exile that Antsy protects by keeping busy helping me achieve. I turn my attention calmly to the exile and say, “I feel you here. I promise I’ll come back and talk with you. Can you relax back and allow space for me to spend more time with Antsy?” I feel the desperation of this little one as it softens back.	Когда Антси делится этим, я чувствую, как на поверхность выходят эмоции другой части. Слёзы на глазах. Другая часть — это изгнанник, которого Антси защищает, помогая мне достичь цели. Я спокойно обращаю внимание на изгнанника и говорю: «Я чувствую тебя здесь. Обещаю, что вернусь и поговорю с тобой. Можете ли вы расслабиться и дать мне возможность проводить больше времени с Антси?» Я чувствую отчаяние этого малыша, когда он смягчается.	When Antsy shares this, I feel the emotion of another part coming to the surface. Tears well in my eyes. This other part is the exile that Antsy protects by keeping busy helping me achieve. I turn my attention calmly to the exile and say, “I feel you here. I promise I’ll come back and talk with you. Can you relax back and allow space for me to spend more time with Antsy?” I feel the desperation of this little one as it softens back.
“Tell me more about your terror of my failure.”	“Tell me more about your terror of my failure.”	«Расскажи мне больше о своем ужасе перед моей неудачей».	“Tell me more about your terror of my failure.”
“Maybe it’s my failure I’m afraid of. Maybe I’m afraid I will fail at keeping you adequately motivated. You’re always reaching for the next big thing, and I don’t know that I can keep up with your bigger and grander goals.”	“Maybe it’s my failure I’m afraid of. Maybe I’m afraid I will fail at keeping you adequately motivated. You’re always reaching for the next big thing, and I don’t know that I can keep up with your bigger and grander goals.”	«Может быть, я боюсь своей неудачи. Возможно, я боюсь, что мне не удастся поддерживать в вас адекватную мотивацию. Ты всегда стремишься к чему-то новому, и я не знаю, смогу ли я идти в ногу с твоими более масштабными и грандиозными целями».	“Maybe it’s my failure I’m afraid of. Maybe I’m afraid I will fail at keeping you adequately motivated. You’re always reaching for the next big thing, and I don’t know that I can keep up with your bigger and grander goals.”
“Antsy, when did you start motivating me in this way?”	“Antsy, when did you start motivating me in this way?”	— Энси, когда ты начал меня таким образом мотивировать?	“Antsy, when did you start motivating me in this way?”
“Probably when you were in elementary school.”	“Probably when you were in elementary school.”	— Наверное, когда ты учился в начальной школе.	“Probably when you were in elementary school.”
Interestedly, I ask, “What was going on during elementary school to cause you to use anxiety as a way to motivate me?”	Interestedly, I ask, “What was going on during elementary school to cause you to use anxiety as a way to motivate me?”	Я с интересом спрашиваю: «Что происходило в начальной школе, что заставило тебя использовать тревогу как способ мотивировать меня?»	Interestedly, I ask, “What was going on during elementary school to cause you to use anxiety as a way to motivate me?”
“I noticed that everyone around you responded positively when you achieved. Your parents were happy and proud and showed you love. Your teachers supported and encouraged your success. So I wanted more of those good feelings for you.”	“I noticed that everyone around you responded positively when you achieved. Your parents were happy and proud and showed you love. Your teachers supported and encouraged your success. So I wanted more of those good feelings for you.”	«Я заметил, что все вокруг положительно реагировали на ваши достижения. Твои родители были счастливы и горды и проявили к тебе любовь. Ваши учителя поддерживали и поощряли ваши успехи. Поэтому я хотел, чтобы к тебе было больше этих добрых чувств».	“I noticed that everyone around you responded positively when you achieved. Your parents were happy and proud and showed you love. Your teachers supported and encouraged your success. So I wanted more of those good feelings for you.”
“Antsy, I’m wondering what you’re afraid would happen if you did not cause anxiety and panic.”	“Antsy, I’m wondering what you’re afraid would happen if you did not cause anxiety and panic.”	«Энтси, мне интересно, чего бы ты боялся, если бы ты не вызывал беспокойства и паники».	“Antsy, I’m wondering what you’re afraid would happen if you did not cause anxiety and panic.”
“Failure!” Antsy shouts.	“Failure!” Antsy shouts.	"Отказ!" — кричит Энси.	“Failure!” Antsy shouts.
“Okay, what are you afraid would happen if we failed?” Antsy sits quietly, with her arms crossed, as she thinks. When she speaks, her voice is much lower. “I’m afraid that if we failed, no one would see you as valuable, and you’d be unlovable and alone.”	“Okay, what are you afraid would happen if we failed?” Antsy sits quietly, with her arms crossed, as she thinks. When she speaks, her voice is much lower. “I’m afraid that if we failed, no one would see you as valuable, and you’d be unlovable and alone.”	«Хорошо, а чего ты боишься, если мы потерпим неудачу?» Энси тихо сидит, скрестив руки, и думает. Когда она говорит, ее голос намного ниже. «Я боюсь, что если мы потерпим неудачу, никто не будет считать тебя ценным, и ты будешь непривлекательным и одиноким».	“Okay, what are you afraid would happen if we failed?” Antsy sits quietly, with her arms crossed, as she thinks. When she speaks, her voice is much lower. “I’m afraid that if we failed, no one would see you as valuable, and you’d be unlovable and alone.”
Over time, I have gained clarity that Antsy’s role in my system is achievement. She does an excellent job of creating a level of anxiety to motivate me to keep moving toward my goals. However, she experiences what feels like life-threatening panic when major goals are achieved. At these times, she finds herself in a transitional space of not knowing what I will pursue next and, more importantly, whether she can measure up to the next challenge. She uses my entire body to communicate her terror of failure. Antsy believes I receive love by achieving. Ultimately, she is protecting me from feeling unlovable and being alone. The only way to learn the true purpose behind the extreme behaviors and beliefs of our parts is to come into relationship with them through befriending. When we show them genuine interests, they feel seen and valued, which encourages them to trust us enough to share.	Over time, I have gained clarity that Antsy’s role in my system is achievement. She does an excellent job of creating a level of anxiety to motivate me to keep moving toward my goals. However, she experiences what feels like life-threatening panic when major goals are achieved. At these times, she finds herself in a transitional space of not knowing what I will pursue next and, more importantly, whether she can measure up to the next challenge. She uses my entire body to communicate her terror of failure. Antsy believes I receive love by achieving. Ultimately, she is protecting me from feeling unlovable and being alone. The only way to learn the true purpose behind the extreme behaviors and beliefs of our parts is to come into relationship with them through befriending. When we show them genuine interests, they feel seen and valued, which encourages them to trust us enough to share.	Со временем я понял, что роль Antsy в моей системе — это достижения. Она отлично справляется с созданием определенного уровня тревоги, мотивирующей меня продолжать двигаться к своим целям. Однако, когда основные цели достигнуты, она испытывает нечто похожее на опасную для жизни панику. В такие моменты она оказывается в переходном состоянии, когда не знает, чем я буду заниматься дальше и, что более важно, сможет ли она справиться со следующим испытанием. Она использует все мое тело, чтобы выразить свой ужас перед неудачей. Энси считает, что я получаю любовь, достигая чего-то. В конечном счете, она защищает меня от чувства непривлекательности и одиночества. Единственный способ узнать истинную цель экстремального поведения и убеждений наших частей — это вступить с ними в отношения, подружившись с ними. Когда мы показываем им искренние интересы, они чувствуют, что их видят и ценят, что побуждает их достаточно доверять нам, чтобы делиться.	Over time, I have gained clarity that Antsy’s role in my system is achievement. She does an excellent job of creating a level of anxiety to motivate me to keep moving toward my goals. However, she experiences what feels like life-threatening panic when major goals are achieved. At these times, she finds herself in a transitional space of not knowing what I will pursue next and, more importantly, whether she can measure up to the next challenge. She uses my entire body to communicate her terror of failure. Antsy believes I receive love by achieving. Ultimately, she is protecting me from feeling unlovable and being alone. The only way to learn the true purpose behind the extreme behaviors and beliefs of our parts is to come into relationship with them through befriending. When we show them genuine interests, they feel seen and valued, which encourages them to trust us enough to share.
IFS CONCEPT 1: BEFRIEND	IFS CONCEPT 1: BEFRIEND	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: ДРУГ	IFS CONCEPT 1: BEFRIEND
Befriending is getting to know a part by interacting with it and building a Self-to-part relationship. Parts are leading the system because they lack awareness of Self or, if they do have awareness, they don’t trust Self. Therefore, our protectors continue in the extreme roles they have taken on because they believe they don’t have any other choice. They do not know they can rely on Self as a resource to guide, support, and heal. Before Self can befriend a part, there needs to be awareness of the part in or around the body. We have to notice the part before we can come into relationship with it. Once there is a sense of the part, we may have to ask the part to unblend or separate from us, allowing us to come into relationship with it. We know Self is preparing to befriend the part and not another part, when we experience one of the qualities of Self, compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, clarity, confidence, courage, or creativity toward the part. If we feel something other than a Self quality, then another part is present, and we need to ask that part to step back. For example, when I felt the energy of the young exile while working with Antsy, I asked that part to step back and allow Antsy and me more time.	Befriending is getting to know a part by interacting with it and building a Self-to-part relationship. Parts are leading the system because they lack awareness of Self or, if they do have awareness, they don’t trust Self. Therefore, our protectors continue in the extreme roles they have taken on because they believe they don’t have any other choice. They do not know they can rely on Self as a resource to guide, support, and heal. Before Self can befriend a part, there needs to be awareness of the part in or around the body. We have to notice the part before we can come into relationship with it. Once there is a sense of the part, we may have to ask the part to unblend or separate from us, allowing us to come into relationship with it. We know Self is preparing to befriend the part and not another part, when we experience one of the qualities of Self, compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, clarity, confidence, courage, or creativity toward the part. If we feel something other than a Self quality, then another part is present, and we need to ask that part to step back. For example, when I felt the energy of the young exile while working with Antsy, I asked that part to step back and allow Antsy and me more time.	Подружиться — значит узнать часть, взаимодействуя с ней и выстраивая отношения «Я-часть». Части руководят системой, потому что им не хватает осознания «Я», а если оно и есть, то они не доверяют «Я». Поэтому наши защитники продолжают выполнять экстремальные роли, которые они взяли на себя, потому что считают, что у них нет другого выбора. Они не знают, что могут полагаться на «Я» как на ресурс, направляющий, поддерживающий и исцеляющий. Прежде чем «Я» сможет подружиться с частью, необходимо осознать эту часть внутри тела или вокруг него. Мы должны заметить эту часть, прежде чем мы сможем вступить с ней в отношения. Как только мы почувствуем часть, нам, возможно, придется попросить эту часть отделиться от нас, позволив нам войти в отношения с ней. Мы знаем, что «Я» готовится подружиться с этой частью, а не с другой частью, когда мы испытываем одно из качеств «Я»: сострадание, любопытство, спокойствие, связанность, ясность, уверенность, смелость или творческий подход по отношению к части. Если мы чувствуем что-то иное, чем качество Самости, значит, присутствует другая часть, и нам нужно попросить эту часть отступить. Например, когда я почувствовал энергию молодого изгнанника во время работы с Антси, я попросил эту часть отступить и дать нам с Антси больше времени.	Befriending is getting to know a part by interacting with it and building a Self-to-part relationship. Parts are leading the system because they lack awareness of Self or, if they do have awareness, they don’t trust Self. Therefore, our protectors continue in the extreme roles they have taken on because they believe they don’t have any other choice. They do not know they can rely on Self as a resource to guide, support, and heal. Before Self can befriend a part, there needs to be awareness of the part in or around the body. We have to notice the part before we can come into relationship with it. Once there is a sense of the part, we may have to ask the part to unblend or separate from us, allowing us to come into relationship with it. We know Self is preparing to befriend the part and not another part, when we experience one of the qualities of Self, compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, clarity, confidence, courage, or creativity toward the part. If we feel something other than a Self quality, then another part is present, and we need to ask that part to step back. For example, when I felt the energy of the young exile while working with Antsy, I asked that part to step back and allow Antsy and me more time.
When we experience one of the eight Cs, or essential qualities of Self, toward a part, we want to share that energy with the part by directing it toward the part. If we’re feeling connected to the part, we want to energetically share that connectedness with the part. Often, the part will relax or express curiosity or interest in us. We want to extend the energy of Self until we notice some change in the part. This may happen quickly, or it may take some time. If we are feeling compassion or curiosity or any other quality in addition to connection, we want to extend that energy too. This is especially true if the part is skeptical of Self or takes longer to relax in the presence of Self. Proximity also helps parts connect with Self. If the part is at a distance or has its back turned or seems disinterested, moving physically closer to the part while extending the energy of one of the eight Cs may open the part to the presence of Self.	When we experience one of the eight Cs, or essential qualities of Self, toward a part, we want to share that energy with the part by directing it toward the part. If we’re feeling connected to the part, we want to energetically share that connectedness with the part. Often, the part will relax or express curiosity or interest in us. We want to extend the energy of Self until we notice some change in the part. This may happen quickly, or it may take some time. If we are feeling compassion or curiosity or any other quality in addition to connection, we want to extend that energy too. This is especially true if the part is skeptical of Self or takes longer to relax in the presence of Self. Proximity also helps parts connect with Self. If the part is at a distance or has its back turned or seems disinterested, moving physically closer to the part while extending the energy of one of the eight Cs may open the part to the presence of Self.	Когда мы испытываем одно из восьми С, или существенных качеств Самости, по отношению к части, мы хотим поделиться этой энергией с частью, направляя ее на эту часть. Если мы чувствуем связь с частью, мы хотим энергетически поделиться этой связью с частью. Часто эта часть расслабляется или выражает любопытство или интерес к нам. Мы хотим расширять энергию «Я» до тех пор, пока не заметим какое-то изменение в этой части. Это может произойти быстро, а может занять некоторое время. Если мы чувствуем сострадание, любопытство или какое-либо другое качество помимо связи, мы хотим расширить и эту энергию. Это особенно верно, если часть скептически относится к «Я» или ей требуется больше времени, чтобы расслабиться в присутствии «Я». Близость также помогает частям соединиться с «Я». Если часть находится на расстоянии, повернута спиной или кажется незаинтересованной, физическое перемещение ближе к части, одновременно расширяя энергию одного из восьми С, может открыть часть для присутствия Самости.	When we experience one of the eight Cs, or essential qualities of Self, toward a part, we want to share that energy with the part by directing it toward the part. If we’re feeling connected to the part, we want to energetically share that connectedness with the part. Often, the part will relax or express curiosity or interest in us. We want to extend the energy of Self until we notice some change in the part. This may happen quickly, or it may take some time. If we are feeling compassion or curiosity or any other quality in addition to connection, we want to extend that energy too. This is especially true if the part is skeptical of Self or takes longer to relax in the presence of Self. Proximity also helps parts connect with Self. If the part is at a distance or has its back turned or seems disinterested, moving physically closer to the part while extending the energy of one of the eight Cs may open the part to the presence of Self.
There are several ways to deepen the befriending process. When we extend the quality of Self toward the part, we want to notice how the part responds. This provides information about how interested the part is in connecting with us. Does the part relax or ignore us? Do we get the sense that a different part is present? We want the part to notice Self. If the part has no awareness of Self before this interaction, it may take it a while to acknowledge or understand what is happening. We want to allow time for the part to feel our presence with it. We can slow down and take our time at this point and be with the part in a way that feels right for the part. Different parts of us will need different amounts and kinds of connection and energy from Self. They are not one-size-fits-all parts. However, because of the intuitive nature of Self, we will know how to engage our parts, giving them what they need in the present. Once the part notices Self, relaxes, or seems interested, we let the part know we want to get to know it better. As the part shares about itself, we want to express genuine curiosity, validating and demonstrating compassion for the part’s experiences. We also want to learn how the part protects us. The conversation with the part is not one-sided. We can say what we would like to say or ask of the part.	There are several ways to deepen the befriending process. When we extend the quality of Self toward the part, we want to notice how the part responds. This provides information about how interested the part is in connecting with us. Does the part relax or ignore us? Do we get the sense that a different part is present? We want the part to notice Self. If the part has no awareness of Self before this interaction, it may take it a while to acknowledge or understand what is happening. We want to allow time for the part to feel our presence with it. We can slow down and take our time at this point and be with the part in a way that feels right for the part. Different parts of us will need different amounts and kinds of connection and energy from Self. They are not one-size-fits-all parts. However, because of the intuitive nature of Self, we will know how to engage our parts, giving them what they need in the present. Once the part notices Self, relaxes, or seems interested, we let the part know we want to get to know it better. As the part shares about itself, we want to express genuine curiosity, validating and demonstrating compassion for the part’s experiences. We also want to learn how the part protects us. The conversation with the part is not one-sided. We can say what we would like to say or ask of the part.	Есть несколько способов углубить процесс дружбы. Когда мы распространяем качество Я на часть, мы хотим заметить, как эта часть реагирует. Это дает информацию о том, насколько заинтересована эта часть в контакте с нами. Часть расслабляется или игнорирует нас? Ощущаем ли мы, что присутствует другая часть? Мы хотим, чтобы эта часть заметила Я. Если перед этим взаимодействием часть не осознавала Себя, может потребоваться некоторое время, чтобы признать или понять, что происходит. Мы хотим дать части время почувствовать наше присутствие рядом с ней. На этом этапе мы можем замедлиться и не торопиться и работать с ролью так, как нам кажется правильным для этой роли. Разным частям нас потребуется разное количество и вид связи и энергии от «Я». Это не универсальные детали. Однако благодаря интуитивной природе «Я» мы будем знать, как задействовать свои части, давая им то, что им нужно в настоящем. Как только часть замечает «Я», расслабляется или проявляет интерес, мы даем ей понять, что хотим узнать ее получше. Когда часть рассказывает о себе, мы хотим выразить искреннее любопытство, подтверждая и демонстрируя сострадание к переживаниям части. Мы также хотим узнать, как эта часть нас защищает. Разговор с частью не односторонний. Мы можем сказать то, что хотели бы сказать или спросить о части.	There are several ways to deepen the befriending process. When we extend the quality of Self toward the part, we want to notice how the part responds. This provides information about how interested the part is in connecting with us. Does the part relax or ignore us? Do we get the sense that a different part is present? We want the part to notice Self. If the part has no awareness of Self before this interaction, it may take it a while to acknowledge or understand what is happening. We want to allow time for the part to feel our presence with it. We can slow down and take our time at this point and be with the part in a way that feels right for the part. Different parts of us will need different amounts and kinds of connection and energy from Self. They are not one-size-fits-all parts. However, because of the intuitive nature of Self, we will know how to engage our parts, giving them what they need in the present. Once the part notices Self, relaxes, or seems interested, we let the part know we want to get to know it better. As the part shares about itself, we want to express genuine curiosity, validating and demonstrating compassion for the part’s experiences. We also want to learn how the part protects us. The conversation with the part is not one-sided. We can say what we would like to say or ask of the part.
Let’s turn back to Antsy. When she separated or unblended from me by decreasing the intensity of somatic sensations, I (Self) was able to befriend her. To recap: I started by expressing curiosity about the cause of Antsy’s panic. I learned that she was terrified as I reached several significant life goals within a two-year period. Achieving the goal of successfully raising and launching five children with my husband allowed us to pursue the dream life of traveling internationally full-time. I had pursued the goal of writing a book for over 20 years and the goal of becoming an IFS Lead Trainer for five years. With these major accomplishments coming to fruition, Antsy’s terror of failure was amplified. She seemed to express anxiety while in pursuit of a goal, but panicked when the goal was attained.	Let’s turn back to Antsy. When she separated or unblended from me by decreasing the intensity of somatic sensations, I (Self) was able to befriend her. To recap: I started by expressing curiosity about the cause of Antsy’s panic. I learned that she was terrified as I reached several significant life goals within a two-year period. Achieving the goal of successfully raising and launching five children with my husband allowed us to pursue the dream life of traveling internationally full-time. I had pursued the goal of writing a book for over 20 years and the goal of becoming an IFS Lead Trainer for five years. With these major accomplishments coming to fruition, Antsy’s terror of failure was amplified. She seemed to express anxiety while in pursuit of a goal, but panicked when the goal was attained.	Вернемся к Анси. Когда она отделилась от меня или разделилась со мной, уменьшив интенсивность соматических ощущений, я (Самость) смог подружиться с ней. Подведем итог: я начал с того, что выразил любопытство по поводу причины паники Антси. Я узнал, что она была в ужасе, когда за два года я достиг нескольких важных жизненных целей. Достижение цели успешного воспитания и рождения пятерых детей вместе с моим мужем позволило нам осуществить мечту о путешествиях по всему миру на постоянной основе. Я преследовал цель написать книгу более 20 лет и стать ведущим тренером IFS в течение пяти лет. Когда эти важные достижения стали реальностью, ужас Антси перед неудачей усилился. Казалось, она выражала тревогу, преследуя цель, но запаниковала, когда цель была достигнута.	Let’s turn back to Antsy. When she separated or unblended from me by decreasing the intensity of somatic sensations, I (Self) was able to befriend her. To recap: I started by expressing curiosity about the cause of Antsy’s panic. I learned that she was terrified as I reached several significant life goals within a two-year period. Achieving the goal of successfully raising and launching five children with my husband allowed us to pursue the dream life of traveling internationally full-time. I had pursued the goal of writing a book for over 20 years and the goal of becoming an IFS Lead Trainer for five years. With these major accomplishments coming to fruition, Antsy’s terror of failure was amplified. She seemed to express anxiety while in pursuit of a goal, but panicked when the goal was attained.
As Self befriended Antsy, she experienced the presence of Self more fully. In a Self-led way, I continued to encourage her to calm and reassure her that she was safe. The placing of the hand on the heart was another way that Self let Antsy know she was not alone. Self is intuitive and had a sense that touch would deepen the connection with Antsy and help her to calm. Touch is a very powerful comforter for some parts. If touch is something your parts respond positively to, use it to support the unblending and befriending process. If not, that’s okay too. The use of a calming voice with words of reassurance is the basis for building a trusting relationship with parts.	As Self befriended Antsy, she experienced the presence of Self more fully. In a Self-led way, I continued to encourage her to calm and reassure her that she was safe. The placing of the hand on the heart was another way that Self let Antsy know she was not alone. Self is intuitive and had a sense that touch would deepen the connection with Antsy and help her to calm. Touch is a very powerful comforter for some parts. If touch is something your parts respond positively to, use it to support the unblending and befriending process. If not, that’s okay too. The use of a calming voice with words of reassurance is the basis for building a trusting relationship with parts.	Когда Селф подружился с Энси, она более полно ощутила присутствие Селфа. Самостоятельно я продолжал убеждать ее успокоиться и заверить ее, что она в безопасности. Положив руку на сердце, Селф дал понять Энси, что она не одна. Селф обладает интуицией и чувствовал, что прикосновение углубит связь с Энси и поможет ей успокоиться. Прикосновение — очень мощное утешительное средство для некоторых частей тела. Если прикосновение — это то, на что ваши части тела реагируют положительно, используйте его, чтобы поддержать процесс разделения и сближения. Если нет, это тоже нормально. Использование успокаивающего голоса со словами подбадривания – основа построения доверительных отношений с частями.	As Self befriended Antsy, she experienced the presence of Self more fully. In a Self-led way, I continued to encourage her to calm and reassure her that she was safe. The placing of the hand on the heart was another way that Self let Antsy know she was not alone. Self is intuitive and had a sense that touch would deepen the connection with Antsy and help her to calm. Touch is a very powerful comforter for some parts. If touch is something your parts respond positively to, use it to support the unblending and befriending process. If not, that’s okay too. The use of a calming voice with words of reassurance is the basis for building a trusting relationship with parts.
Self continued to befriend Antsy, allowing her to experience qualities of Self-energy. The qualities shared with Antsy were compassion, curiosity, calm, and connectedness. Self also took its time with her; there was no rush for her to do something or change states. During the befriending process, we learned about Antsy’s experiences, which encouraged the relationship to deepen. Self continued to express compassion with curiosity as it began to inquire about what is causing the panic. Self offered more acceptance and reassurance after Antsy shared her fears. She was encouraged to remain separate in times of high fear in order to be in relationship with Self, who can support her through the fear and panic about what comes next.	Self continued to befriend Antsy, allowing her to experience qualities of Self-energy. The qualities shared with Antsy were compassion, curiosity, calm, and connectedness. Self also took its time with her; there was no rush for her to do something or change states. During the befriending process, we learned about Antsy’s experiences, which encouraged the relationship to deepen. Self continued to express compassion with curiosity as it began to inquire about what is causing the panic. Self offered more acceptance and reassurance after Antsy shared her fears. She was encouraged to remain separate in times of high fear in order to be in relationship with Self, who can support her through the fear and panic about what comes next.	Селф продолжал дружить с Энси, позволяя ей ощутить качества энергии Самости. Качествами, общими для Антси, были сострадание, любопытство, спокойствие и коммуникабельность. Селф тоже не торопился с ней; ей не нужно было спешить что-то делать или менять состояние. В процессе дружбы мы узнали об опыте Антси, который способствовал углублению отношений. Селф продолжал с любопытством выражать сострадание и начал расспрашивать о том, что вызывает панику. После того, как Антси поделилась своими страхами, Селф выразила больше признания и уверенности. Ее поощряли оставаться отдельной во времена сильного страха, чтобы поддерживать отношения с Я, который может поддержать ее, несмотря на страх и панику по поводу того, что будет дальше.	Self continued to befriend Antsy, allowing her to experience qualities of Self-energy. The qualities shared with Antsy were compassion, curiosity, calm, and connectedness. Self also took its time with her; there was no rush for her to do something or change states. During the befriending process, we learned about Antsy’s experiences, which encouraged the relationship to deepen. Self continued to express compassion with curiosity as it began to inquire about what is causing the panic. Self offered more acceptance and reassurance after Antsy shared her fears. She was encouraged to remain separate in times of high fear in order to be in relationship with Self, who can support her through the fear and panic about what comes next.
Self can only befriend parts after they unblend. Antsy did not quickly unblend; she did so with the reassuring support of Self. However, parts don’t always unblend even with encouragement and patience. When this happens, Self needs to discover and address the reasons parts won’t unblend. Unblending is necessary to befriend our parts.	Self can only befriend parts after they unblend. Antsy did not quickly unblend; she did so with the reassuring support of Self. However, parts don’t always unblend even with encouragement and patience. When this happens, Self needs to discover and address the reasons parts won’t unblend. Unblending is necessary to befriend our parts.	«Я» может подружиться с частями только после того, как они разъединятся. Энси не сразу растаял; она сделала это при обнадеживающей поддержке Селфа. Однако части не всегда сливаются воедино даже при поддержке и терпении. Когда это происходит, «Я» необходимо обнаружить и устранить причины, по которым части не сливаются. Растворение необходимо, чтобы подружиться с нашими частями.	Self can only befriend parts after they unblend. Antsy did not quickly unblend; she did so with the reassuring support of Self. However, parts don’t always unblend even with encouragement and patience. When this happens, Self needs to discover and address the reasons parts won’t unblend. Unblending is necessary to befriend our parts.
IFS CONCEPT 2: FLESH OUT	IFS CONCEPT 2: FLESH OUT	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: КОНКРЕТНОСТЬ	IFS CONCEPT 2: FLESH OUT
Fleshing out is how we get to know more about our parts and build a deeper, trusting relationship between them and Self. Once we befriend a part, we can ask the part what it would like to share about itself and its experiences. I think about fleshing out as how we might engage a dear friend as they share something difficult about their life or history. We would listen, ask questions based on what they are sharing, show interest and care. This is what Self does: it supports the unfolding of the part’s story and sharing. Self does a good job reflecting to the part the hardship, pain, confusion, overwhelm, or anything else the part is experiencing.	Fleshing out is how we get to know more about our parts and build a deeper, trusting relationship between them and Self. Once we befriend a part, we can ask the part what it would like to share about itself and its experiences. I think about fleshing out as how we might engage a dear friend as they share something difficult about their life or history. We would listen, ask questions based on what they are sharing, show interest and care. This is what Self does: it supports the unfolding of the part’s story and sharing. Self does a good job reflecting to the part the hardship, pain, confusion, overwhelm, or anything else the part is experiencing.	Детализация — это то, как мы узнаем больше о своих частях и выстраиваем более глубокие, доверительные отношения между ними и Собой. Подружившись с частью, мы можем спросить ее, чем она хотела бы поделиться о себе и своем опыте. Я думаю о том, чтобы конкретизировать то, как мы могли бы привлечь дорогого друга, когда он расскажет что-то сложное из своей жизни или истории. Мы слушали, задавали вопросы, исходя из того, чем они делятся, проявляли интерес и заботу. Это то, что делает «Я»: оно поддерживает раскрытие истории части и обмен ею. «Я» хорошо справляется с задачей отражения в той части трудностей, боли, замешательства, подавленности или чего-либо еще, что эта часть испытывает.	Fleshing out is how we get to know more about our parts and build a deeper, trusting relationship between them and Self. Once we befriend a part, we can ask the part what it would like to share about itself and its experiences. I think about fleshing out as how we might engage a dear friend as they share something difficult about their life or history. We would listen, ask questions based on what they are sharing, show interest and care. This is what Self does: it supports the unfolding of the part’s story and sharing. Self does a good job reflecting to the part the hardship, pain, confusion, overwhelm, or anything else the part is experiencing.
Validation and understanding are important in fleshing out. When parts feel seen by Self, we can find out their role in the system, how they took on their current role, and what they hope to accomplish. These questions often point to an early wounding experienced by us. Which leads to who the part is protecting and informs Self where healing can occur.	Validation and understanding are important in fleshing out. When parts feel seen by Self, we can find out their role in the system, how they took on their current role, and what they hope to accomplish. These questions often point to an early wounding experienced by us. Which leads to who the part is protecting and informs Self where healing can occur.	Проверка и понимание важны для конкретизации. Когда части чувствуют, что их видит «Я», мы можем узнать их роль в системе, как они взяли на себя свою текущую роль и чего они надеются достичь. Эти вопросы часто указывают на раннюю рану, которую мы пережили. Это приводит к тому, кого защищает эта часть, и сообщает Себе, где может произойти исцеление.	Validation and understanding are important in fleshing out. When parts feel seen by Self, we can find out their role in the system, how they took on their current role, and what they hope to accomplish. These questions often point to an early wounding experienced by us. Which leads to who the part is protecting and informs Self where healing can occur.
IFS CONCEPT 3: DIRECT ACCESS	IFS CONCEPT 3: DIRECT ACCESS	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 3: ПРЯМОЙ ДОСТУП	IFS CONCEPT 3: DIRECT ACCESS
Up to this point, I have shared how to notice, get to know, and befriend parts from your Self. In IFS, this is called In-sight. In-sight is hyphenated to highlight that it is the seeing or sight that happens when we go inside. Parts come into relationship with you (your Self), building a Self-to-part relationship. There’s another way to connect with parts that requires working with another person, usually a therapist, practitioner, or coach. This technique is called Direct Access. Instead of you coming into relationship with your parts, the therapist or other professional builds a Self-to-part relationship with your parts using their Self. This involves you blending with the part or becoming the part, allowing the therapist to speak directly with your part. Direct Access is most beneficial with parts that don’t trust you or have no awareness of Self (you). Direct Access allows these parts an opportunity to experience the healing power of Self outside of your system. This usually results in parts being open to connecting with you after interacting with a compassionate other in the Self of the therapist. The goals of Direct Access are to validate the part, to be curious about its experiences, to address its fears, and build trust. Once the part feels heard and its concerns have been adequately addressed, it is more willing and likely to unblend and come into relationship with you.	Up to this point, I have shared how to notice, get to know, and befriend parts from your Self. In IFS, this is called In-sight. In-sight is hyphenated to highlight that it is the seeing or sight that happens when we go inside. Parts come into relationship with you (your Self), building a Self-to-part relationship. There’s another way to connect with parts that requires working with another person, usually a therapist, practitioner, or coach. This technique is called Direct Access. Instead of you coming into relationship with your parts, the therapist or other professional builds a Self-to-part relationship with your parts using their Self. This involves you blending with the part or becoming the part, allowing the therapist to speak directly with your part. Direct Access is most beneficial with parts that don’t trust you or have no awareness of Self (you). Direct Access allows these parts an opportunity to experience the healing power of Self outside of your system. This usually results in parts being open to connecting with you after interacting with a compassionate other in the Self of the therapist. The goals of Direct Access are to validate the part, to be curious about its experiences, to address its fears, and build trust. Once the part feels heard and its concerns have been adequately addressed, it is more willing and likely to unblend and come into relationship with you.	До этого момента я рассказывал, как замечать, узнавать и подружиться с частями своего Я. В IFS это называется In-sight. In-sight пишется через дефис, чтобы подчеркнуть, что именно видение или зрелище происходит, когда мы заходим внутрь. Части вступают во взаимоотношения с вами (вашим «Я»), выстраивая отношения «Я-части». Есть еще один способ соединения частей, требующий работы с другим человеком, обычно с терапевтом, практикующим специалистом или тренером. Этот метод называется прямым доступом. Вместо того, чтобы вы вступали в отношения со своими частями, терапевт или другой профессионал выстраивает отношения «Я-часть» с вашими частями, используя их «Я». Это предполагает, что вы сливаетесь с частью или становитесь ею, позволяя терапевту говорить напрямую с вашей частью. Прямой доступ наиболее полезен для частей, которые вам не доверяют или не осознают себя (вас). Прямой доступ дает этим частям возможность ощутить целительную силу «Я» вне вашей системы. Обычно это приводит к тому, что части тела открываются для связи с вами после взаимодействия с сострадательным другим в Самости терапевта. Цели прямого доступа — проверить деталь, поинтересоваться ее опытом, развеять ее страхи и укрепить доверие. Как только часть почувствует, что ее услышали и ее проблемы были адекватно решены, она с большей вероятностью расстанется и вступит в отношения с вами.	Up to this point, I have shared how to notice, get to know, and befriend parts from your Self. In IFS, this is called In-sight. In-sight is hyphenated to highlight that it is the seeing or sight that happens when we go inside. Parts come into relationship with you (your Self), building a Self-to-part relationship. There’s another way to connect with parts that requires working with another person, usually a therapist, practitioner, or coach. This technique is called Direct Access. Instead of you coming into relationship with your parts, the therapist or other professional builds a Self-to-part relationship with your parts using their Self. This involves you blending with the part or becoming the part, allowing the therapist to speak directly with your part. Direct Access is most beneficial with parts that don’t trust you or have no awareness of Self (you). Direct Access allows these parts an opportunity to experience the healing power of Self outside of your system. This usually results in parts being open to connecting with you after interacting with a compassionate other in the Self of the therapist. The goals of Direct Access are to validate the part, to be curious about its experiences, to address its fears, and build trust. Once the part feels heard and its concerns have been adequately addressed, it is more willing and likely to unblend and come into relationship with you.
The following case vignette is an example of the use of Direct Access to befriend a part with suicidal thoughts and actions. Since IFS holds that all parts have positive intentions, a key factor in befriending parts that think about harm and/or act on these thoughts is to discover their positive intentions.	The following case vignette is an example of the use of Direct Access to befriend a part with suicidal thoughts and actions. Since IFS holds that all parts have positive intentions, a key factor in befriending parts that think about harm and/or act on these thoughts is to discover their positive intentions.	Следующий случай представляет собой пример использования прямого доступа для подружки с частью с суицидальными мыслями и действиями. Поскольку IFS утверждает, что все части имеют позитивные намерения, ключевым фактором в подружке с частями, которые думают о вреде и/или действуют в соответствии с этими мыслями, является обнаружение их позитивных намерений.	The following case vignette is an example of the use of Direct Access to befriend a part with suicidal thoughts and actions. Since IFS holds that all parts have positive intentions, a key factor in befriending parts that think about harm and/or act on these thoughts is to discover their positive intentions.
Case Vignette: The Suicidal Part	Case Vignette: The Suicidal Part	Пример из дела: Суицидальная часть	Case Vignette: The Suicidal Part
When I met Fern, she was estranged from her family of origin for several years. She identifies as biracial with a Black mother and white father. She never met her biological father and was raised by a stepfather who is also white. Fern came for therapy with severe depression and suicidal thoughts. She has a history of traumatic sexual abuse by her stepfather and his brother. The depth of her despair and worthlessness filled the therapy room. Fern has attempted suicide multiple times since childhood and experienced more hospitalizations than she could give an accurate count of.	When I met Fern, she was estranged from her family of origin for several years. She identifies as biracial with a Black mother and white father. She never met her biological father and was raised by a stepfather who is also white. Fern came for therapy with severe depression and suicidal thoughts. She has a history of traumatic sexual abuse by her stepfather and his brother. The depth of her despair and worthlessness filled the therapy room. Fern has attempted suicide multiple times since childhood and experienced more hospitalizations than she could give an accurate count of.	Когда я встретил Ферн, она несколько лет жила отдельно от своей родной семьи. Она идентифицирует себя как двухрасовую с чернокожей матерью и белым отцом. Она никогда не встречалась со своим биологическим отцом, и ее воспитывал отчим, который тоже был белым. Ферн пришла на терапию с тяжелой депрессией и суицидальными мыслями. В прошлом она подвергалась травмирующему сексуальному насилию со стороны отчима и его брата. Глубина ее отчаяния и никчемности наполнила терапевтическую комнату. С детства Ферн несколько раз пыталась покончить жизнь самоубийством, и ее госпитализировали чаще, чем она могла точно подсчитать.	When I met Fern, she was estranged from her family of origin for several years. She identifies as biracial with a Black mother and white father. She never met her biological father and was raised by a stepfather who is also white. Fern came for therapy with severe depression and suicidal thoughts. She has a history of traumatic sexual abuse by her stepfather and his brother. The depth of her despair and worthlessness filled the therapy room. Fern has attempted suicide multiple times since childhood and experienced more hospitalizations than she could give an accurate count of.
I believe therapists are most activated by parts that want to hurt or kill the client. With Fern, we worked with such a part—her part that considers suicide and has attempted suicide on multiple occasions.	I believe therapists are most activated by parts that want to hurt or kill the client. With Fern, we worked with such a part—her part that considers suicide and has attempted suicide on multiple occasions.	Я считаю, что терапевтов больше всего активизируют части, которые хотят причинить вред или убить клиента. С Ферн мы работали с такой частью — той частью, которая думает о самоубийстве и неоднократно предпринимала попытки самоубийства.	I believe therapists are most activated by parts that want to hurt or kill the client. With Fern, we worked with such a part—her part that considers suicide and has attempted suicide on multiple occasions.
When Fern arrives at the session, she is already blended with this part that views suicide as an option to her despair and depression. She sits crumpled on the couch.	When Fern arrives at the session, she is already blended with this part that views suicide as an option to her despair and depression. She sits crumpled on the couch.	Когда Ферн приходит на сеанс, она уже смешалась с той частью, которая рассматривает самоубийство как вариант своего отчаяния и депрессии. Она сидит, скорчившись, на диване.	When Fern arrives at the session, she is already blended with this part that views suicide as an option to her despair and depression. She sits crumpled on the couch.
“Nothing is ever going to change,” Fern’s suicidal part says. “I’ve tried everything. The pain is never going to stop.”	“Nothing is ever going to change,” Fern’s suicidal part says. “I’ve tried everything. The pain is never going to stop.”	«Ничто никогда не изменится», — говорит суицидальная часть Ферн. «Я перепробовал все. Боль никогда не прекратится».	“Nothing is ever going to change,” Fern’s suicidal part says. “I’ve tried everything. The pain is never going to stop.”
“I hear that things feel hopeless right now,” I offer.	“I hear that things feel hopeless right now,” I offer.	«Я слышал, что сейчас все кажется безнадежным», — предлагаю я.	“I hear that things feel hopeless right now,” I offer.
“Hopeless, dark, unending. I need the pain to end, it’s too much.”	“Hopeless, dark, unending. I need the pain to end, it’s too much.”	«Безнадежное, темное, бесконечное. Мне нужно, чтобы боль прекратилась, это слишком сильно».	“Hopeless, dark, unending. I need the pain to end, it’s too much.”
“Tell me more about the pain being too much,” I inquire softly.	“Tell me more about the pain being too much,” I inquire softly.	— Расскажи мне подробнее о том, что боль слишком сильная, — тихо спрашиваю я.	“Tell me more about the pain being too much,” I inquire softly.
“It feels like being on a medieval torture rack being twisted and stretched to the point of excruciating pain. Why would I want to stick around for more of that?”	“It feels like being on a medieval torture rack being twisted and stretched to the point of excruciating pain. Why would I want to stick around for more of that?”	«Это похоже на то, как будто находишься на средневековой пыточной стойке, когда тебя скручивают и растягивают до мучительной боли. Зачем мне оставаться здесь ради большего?»	“It feels like being on a medieval torture rack being twisted and stretched to the point of excruciating pain. Why would I want to stick around for more of that?”
“Maybe you want to stick around because a small part of you has a glimmer of hope,” I say compassionately.	“Maybe you want to stick around because a small part of you has a glimmer of hope,” I say compassionately.	«Может быть, ты хочешь остаться здесь, потому что у небольшой части тебя есть проблеск надежды», — говорю я сочувственно.	“Maybe you want to stick around because a small part of you has a glimmer of hope,” I say compassionately.
“Hope has let me down a thousand times. Hope is useless. I know a sure way out of this pain.”	“Hope has let me down a thousand times. Hope is useless. I know a sure way out of this pain.”	«Надежда меня подводила тысячу раз. Надежда бесполезна. Я знаю верный выход из этой боли.	“Hope has let me down a thousand times. Hope is useless. I know a sure way out of this pain.”
“So, what I’m hearing is you want the pain to stop, right?”	“So, what I’m hearing is you want the pain to stop, right?”	«Итак, я слышу, что ты хочешь, чтобы боль прекратилась, верно?»	“So, what I’m hearing is you want the pain to stop, right?”
“I can’t. I can’t keep suffering like this,” Fern shakes her head with closed eyes. “I’ve tried to stop the pain with pills, drugs, and cutting many times, but it didn’t work. Someone always saves me. For what? For me to survive to endure the same agony. No one can fix this for me. Only I can.”	“I can’t. I can’t keep suffering like this,” Fern shakes her head with closed eyes. “I’ve tried to stop the pain with pills, drugs, and cutting many times, but it didn’t work. Someone always saves me. For what? For me to survive to endure the same agony. No one can fix this for me. Only I can.”	«Я не могу. Я не могу продолжать так страдать, — Ферн качает головой с закрытыми глазами. «Я много раз пыталась остановить боль таблетками, лекарствами и порезами, но это не помогало. Меня всегда кто-то спасает. За что? Чтобы мне выжить, нужно пережить такую ​​же агонию. Никто не может исправить это за меня. Только я могу.	“I can’t. I can’t keep suffering like this,” Fern shakes her head with closed eyes. “I’ve tried to stop the pain with pills, drugs, and cutting many times, but it didn’t work. Someone always saves me. For what? For me to survive to endure the same agony. No one can fix this for me. Only I can.”
“Wow, that makes so much sense. Your goal is not to hurt, and the way you accomplish that is by killing yourself.”	“Wow, that makes so much sense. Your goal is not to hurt, and the way you accomplish that is by killing yourself.”	«Ух ты, в этом столько смысла. Ваша цель — не причинить вреда, и вы можете добиться этого, убив себя».	“Wow, that makes so much sense. Your goal is not to hurt, and the way you accomplish that is by killing yourself.”
The part nods and smiles.	The part nods and smiles.	Часть кивает и улыбается.	The part nods and smiles.
“What if I could offer another way to stop your pain without hurting or killing yourself. Would you be interested?”	“What if I could offer another way to stop your pain without hurting or killing yourself. Would you be interested?”	«Что, если бы я мог предложить другой способ остановить вашу боль, не причиняя себе вреда и не убивая себя? Вам будет интересно?»	“What if I could offer another way to stop your pain without hurting or killing yourself. Would you be interested?”
The part looks both confused and curious. “Maybe, but I don’t think there is any other way.”	The part looks both confused and curious. “Maybe, but I don’t think there is any other way.”	Эта часть выглядит одновременно растерянной и любопытной. — Возможно, но я не думаю, что есть другой выход.	The part looks both confused and curious. “Maybe, but I don’t think there is any other way.”
“I know you don’t, but would you be willing to try?”	“I know you don’t, but would you be willing to try?”	— Я знаю, что нет, но ты бы хотел попробовать?	“I know you don’t, but would you be willing to try?”
Slowing, with emphasis on each word, the part says, “I . . . only . . . want . . . to. . . stop . . . hurting!”	Slowing, with emphasis on each word, the part says, “I . . . only . . . want . . . to. . . stop . . . hurting!”	Медленно, с акцентом на каждое слово, часть произносит: «Я. . . только . . . хотеть . . . к. . . останавливаться . . . больно!»	Slowing, with emphasis on each word, the part says, “I . . . only . . . want . . . to. . . stop . . . hurting!”
“Is that a yes?” I ask, because I want to be certain before moving forward.	“Is that a yes?” I ask, because I want to be certain before moving forward.	«Это да?» Я спрашиваю, потому что хочу быть уверенным, прежде чем двигаться дальше.	“Is that a yes?” I ask, because I want to be certain before moving forward.
“Yes, I’ll try.”	“Yes, I’ll try.”	«Да, я попробую».	“Yes, I’ll try.”
After using Direct Access and receiving buy-in from the part, my work with Fern moves into a new phase. I encourage the part to unblend from Fern and come into relationship with Fern’s Self. Once the part unblends, I support Fern in befriending the part to increase the trust between the part and Fern’s Self. With trust established, we work toward healing the exile the suicidal part protects.	After using Direct Access and receiving buy-in from the part, my work with Fern moves into a new phase. I encourage the part to unblend from Fern and come into relationship with Fern’s Self. Once the part unblends, I support Fern in befriending the part to increase the trust between the part and Fern’s Self. With trust established, we work toward healing the exile the suicidal part protects.	После использования Direct Access и получения поддержки со стороны моя работа с Fern переходит в новый этап. Я призываю эту часть отделиться от Ферн и вступить в отношения с Самостью Ферн. Как только часть распадается, я поддерживаю Ферн в ее дружбе, чтобы повысить доверие между частью и Самостью Ферн. Установив доверие, мы работаем над исцелением изгнанника, которого защищает суицидальная часть.	After using Direct Access and receiving buy-in from the part, my work with Fern moves into a new phase. I encourage the part to unblend from Fern and come into relationship with Fern’s Self. Once the part unblends, I support Fern in befriending the part to increase the trust between the part and Fern’s Self. With trust established, we work toward healing the exile the suicidal part protects.
Meditation: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors	Meditation: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors	Медитация: Кристальная пещера с предками	Meditation: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors
As I spent more time getting to know my ancestors in my mother’s mother’s line, they continued to support me in learning the IFS model by offering meditations inspired by the model. I found this extremely surprising. I wondered, “How do they know my heart so clearly and offer precisely what I need to achieve my goals?” What I learned is our ancestors love us immensely and conspire for our highest good. To this end, my ancestors led me to work with my most challenging parts by drawing on the Self-energy of my ancestral lines.	As I spent more time getting to know my ancestors in my mother’s mother’s line, they continued to support me in learning the IFS model by offering meditations inspired by the model. I found this extremely surprising. I wondered, “How do they know my heart so clearly and offer precisely what I need to achieve my goals?” What I learned is our ancestors love us immensely and conspire for our highest good. To this end, my ancestors led me to work with my most challenging parts by drawing on the Self-energy of my ancestral lines.	Поскольку я тратил больше времени на знакомство со своими предками по материнской линии, они продолжали поддерживать меня в изучении модели IFS, предлагая медитации, вдохновленные этой моделью. Я нашел это чрезвычайно удивительным. Я задавался вопросом: «Как они так ясно знают мое сердце и предлагают именно то, что мне нужно для достижения моих целей?» Я узнал, что наши предки безмерно любят нас и действуют ради нашего высшего блага. С этой целью мои предки заставили меня работать с самыми сложными частями тела, опираясь на внутреннюю энергию моих родовых линий.	As I spent more time getting to know my ancestors in my mother’s mother’s line, they continued to support me in learning the IFS model by offering meditations inspired by the model. I found this extremely surprising. I wondered, “How do they know my heart so clearly and offer precisely what I need to achieve my goals?” What I learned is our ancestors love us immensely and conspire for our highest good. To this end, my ancestors led me to work with my most challenging parts by drawing on the Self-energy of my ancestral lines.
This meditation is offered to provide the additional support of ancestor wisdom and Self-energy to support you when working with parts you struggle with.	This meditation is offered to provide the additional support of ancestor wisdom and Self-energy to support you when working with parts you struggle with.	Эта медитация предлагается для того, чтобы обеспечить дополнительную поддержку мудрости предков и внутренней энергии, чтобы поддержать вас при работе с частями, с которыми вы боретесь.	This meditation is offered to provide the additional support of ancestor wisdom and Self-energy to support you when working with parts you struggle with.
Adjust your body until it feels comfortable.	Adjust your body until it feels comfortable.	Регулируйте свое тело, пока оно не почувствует себя комфортно.	Adjust your body until it feels comfortable.
Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Закройте глаза или смягчите взгляд.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.
Notice how your body connects with the surface that supports you.	Notice how your body connects with the surface that supports you.	Обратите внимание, как ваше тело соединяется с поверхностью, которая вас поддерживает.	Notice how your body connects with the surface that supports you.
Inhale from the bottom of your feet, bringing the breath up through your body.	Inhale from the bottom of your feet, bringing the breath up through your body.	Вдохните из ступней, поднимая дыхание через тело.	Inhale from the bottom of your feet, bringing the breath up through your body.
Exhale through your body and out the bottom of your feet.	Exhale through your body and out the bottom of your feet.	Выдохните через тело и через ступни.	Exhale through your body and out the bottom of your feet.
Do this a few times.	Do this a few times.	Сделайте это несколько раз.	Do this a few times.
Picture yourself hiking or walking in a canyon, admiring the breathtaking sites along your way.	Picture yourself hiking or walking in a canyon, admiring the breathtaking sites along your way.	Представьте себя в походе или прогулке по каньону, любуясь захватывающими дух местами на своем пути.	Picture yourself hiking or walking in a canyon, admiring the breathtaking sites along your way.
During your trek, you get caught in a downpour.	During your trek, you get caught in a downpour.	Во время похода вы попадаете под ливень.	During your trek, you get caught in a downpour.
Looking around for a place to wait out the rain, you see a cave.	Looking around for a place to wait out the rain, you see a cave.	Оглядываясь вокруг в поисках места, где можно переждать дождь, вы видите пещеру.	Looking around for a place to wait out the rain, you see a cave.
As you focus on the entrance through the cascading water, you see an ancestor waving for you to join them.	As you focus on the entrance through the cascading water, you see an ancestor waving for you to join them.	Сосредоточившись на входе в каскад воды, вы видите предка, махающего вам рукой, чтобы вы присоединились к ним.	As you focus on the entrance through the cascading water, you see an ancestor waving for you to join them.
Dashing for the cave, you duck inside.	Dashing for the cave, you duck inside.	Бросившись к пещере, вы ныряете внутрь.	Dashing for the cave, you duck inside.
Your ancestor accompanies you deeper inside the darkened space until you see a faint light in the distance.	Your ancestor accompanies you deeper inside the darkened space until you see a faint light in the distance.	Ваш предок сопровождает вас глубже в затемненное пространство, пока вы не увидите вдалеке слабый свет.	Your ancestor accompanies you deeper inside the darkened space until you see a faint light in the distance.
Curiously you take in your surroundings. Your eyes are drawn to the walls of the cave, and you notice colorful, luminous crystals embedded there.	Curiously you take in your surroundings. Your eyes are drawn to the walls of the cave, and you notice colorful, luminous crystals embedded there.	С любопытством вы рассматриваете свое окружение. Ваш взгляд притягивается к стенам пещеры, и вы замечаете вмонтированные в нее разноцветные светящиеся кристаллы.	Curiously you take in your surroundings. Your eyes are drawn to the walls of the cave, and you notice colorful, luminous crystals embedded there.
When your eyes fully adjust to the limited lighting, you see a second ancestor seated on the floor.	When your eyes fully adjust to the limited lighting, you see a second ancestor seated on the floor.	Когда ваши глаза полностью привыкают к ограниченному освещению, вы видите второго предка, сидящего на полу.	When your eyes fully adjust to the limited lighting, you see a second ancestor seated on the floor.
This ancestor welcomes you and invites you and the ancestor who greeted you at the entrance to sit with them.	This ancestor welcomes you and invites you and the ancestor who greeted you at the entrance to sit with them.	Этот предок приветствует вас и приглашает вас и предка, встретившего вас у входа, посидеть с ним.	This ancestor welcomes you and invites you and the ancestor who greeted you at the entrance to sit with them.
Take a moment to visually capture how your ancestors look.	Take a moment to visually capture how your ancestors look.	Найдите минутку, чтобы визуально запечатлеть, как выглядели ваши предки.	Take a moment to visually capture how your ancestors look.
The ancestor who was in the cave says, “We are here to help you with a part of yourself you struggle with. Notice this part and invite it to join us wherever it feels comfortable.”	The ancestor who was in the cave says, “We are here to help you with a part of yourself you struggle with. Notice this part and invite it to join us wherever it feels comfortable.”	Предок, который был в пещере, говорит: «Мы здесь, чтобы помочь вам с той частью вас самих, с которой вы боретесь. Обратите внимание на эту часть и пригласите ее присоединиться к нам, где ей будет удобно».	The ancestor who was in the cave says, “We are here to help you with a part of yourself you struggle with. Notice this part and invite it to join us wherever it feels comfortable.”
The ancestor who greeted you says, “We have seen you wrestle with this part and come to offer wisdom from your ancestral line to support you as you work with this part of yourself.”	The ancestor who greeted you says, “We have seen you wrestle with this part and come to offer wisdom from your ancestral line to support you as you work with this part of yourself.”	Приветствующий вас предок говорит: «Мы видели, как вы боретесь с этой частью и пришли предложить мудрость вашей наследственной линии, чтобы поддержать вас в работе с этой частью себя».	The ancestor who greeted you says, “We have seen you wrestle with this part and come to offer wisdom from your ancestral line to support you as you work with this part of yourself.”
The ancestors encourage you to draw on their energy to increase the Self energy in space if you need to.	The ancestors encourage you to draw on their energy to increase the Self energy in space if you need to.	Предки поощряют вас использовать их энергию для увеличения энергии Самости в пространстве, если вам это необходимо.	The ancestors encourage you to draw on their energy to increase the Self energy in space if you need to.
Then the three of you sit with the part emanating Self-energy toward the part.	Then the three of you sit with the part emanating Self-energy toward the part.	Затем вы втроем садитесь так, чтобы часть излучала Самоэнергию в сторону этой части.	Then the three of you sit with the part emanating Self-energy toward the part.
The ancestors take turns with questions to help you get to know this part.	The ancestors take turns with questions to help you get to know this part.	Предки по очереди задают вопросы, чтобы помочь вам узнать эту часть.	The ancestors take turns with questions to help you get to know this part.
The first ancestor encourages you to ask the part, “How do you help me?”	The first ancestor encourages you to ask the part, “How do you help me?”	Первопредок призывает вас спросить часть: «Чем ты мне поможешь?»	The first ancestor encourages you to ask the part, “How do you help me?”
The second ancestor asks you to ask the part, “How did you start helping me in this way?”	The second ancestor asks you to ask the part, “How did you start helping me in this way?”	Второй предок просит вас спросить часть: «Как ты начал мне таким образом помогать?»	The second ancestor asks you to ask the part, “How did you start helping me in this way?”
Next, you’re instructed to ask, “How long have you been doing this for me?”	Next, you’re instructed to ask, “How long have you been doing this for me?”	Затем вам предлагается спросить: «Как долго вы делаете это для меня?»	Next, you’re instructed to ask, “How long have you been doing this for me?”
The next question you hear is, “What are you trying to accomplish by doing this for me?”	The next question you hear is, “What are you trying to accomplish by doing this for me?”	Следующий вопрос, который вы услышите: «Чего вы пытаетесь достичь, делая это для меня?»	The next question you hear is, “What are you trying to accomplish by doing this for me?”
The first ancestor suggests asking, “Do you like what you’re doing?” Next you hear, “Ask the part what it would rather do if it didn’t need to protect you in this way.”	The first ancestor suggests asking, “Do you like what you’re doing?” Next you hear, “Ask the part what it would rather do if it didn’t need to protect you in this way.”	Первопредок предлагает спросить: «Тебе нравится то, что ты делаешь?» Затем вы слышите: «Спросите часть, что бы она предпочла сделать, если бы ей не нужно было защищать вас таким образом».	The first ancestor suggests asking, “Do you like what you’re doing?” Next you hear, “Ask the part what it would rather do if it didn’t need to protect you in this way.”
Lastly, one of the ancestors asks, “Is there anything you want to say to this part?”	Lastly, one of the ancestors asks, “Is there anything you want to say to this part?”	Наконец, один из предков спрашивает: «Хотите ли вы что-нибудь сказать об этой части?»	Lastly, one of the ancestors asks, “Is there anything you want to say to this part?”
The ancestor gets up, walks to the illuminated wall, and slowly moves their hands over the colorful crystals, pauses at one, and retrieves it.	The ancestor gets up, walks to the illuminated wall, and slowly moves their hands over the colorful crystals, pauses at one, and retrieves it.	Предок встает, подходит к освещенной стене и медленно проводит руками по разноцветным кристаллам, останавливается на одном из них и достает его.	The ancestor gets up, walks to the illuminated wall, and slowly moves their hands over the colorful crystals, pauses at one, and retrieves it.
The ancestor hands the crystal to you, saying, “This crystal will help crystallize what you learned here. Take note of the size, weight, shape, color, and vibration as it represents your part.”	The ancestor hands the crystal to you, saying, “This crystal will help crystallize what you learned here. Take note of the size, weight, shape, color, and vibration as it represents your part.”	Предок передает вам кристалл со словами: «Этот кристалл поможет кристаллизовать то, чему вы здесь научились. Обратите внимание на размер, вес, форму, цвет и вибрацию, поскольку они представляют вашу часть».	The ancestor hands the crystal to you, saying, “This crystal will help crystallize what you learned here. Take note of the size, weight, shape, color, and vibration as it represents your part.”
The other ancestor asks, “Is there anything you want to ask or say to us?”	The other ancestor asks, “Is there anything you want to ask or say to us?”	Другой предок спрашивает: «Вы хотите что-нибудь спросить или сказать нам?»	The other ancestor asks, “Is there anything you want to ask or say to us?”
After this exchange, your ancestors offer to walk you back to the entrance of the cave.	After this exchange, your ancestors offer to walk you back to the entrance of the cave.	После этого разговора ваши предки предлагают проводить вас обратно ко входу в пещеру.	After this exchange, your ancestors offer to walk you back to the entrance of the cave.
As you get closer to the opening, you see the sun shining brightly, lighting your way.	As you get closer to the opening, you see the sun shining brightly, lighting your way.	Подойдя ближе к проему, вы видите ярко светящее солнце, освещающее ваш путь.	As you get closer to the opening, you see the sun shining brightly, lighting your way.
If you would like to, set an intention with your ancestors and the part represented by the crystal.	If you would like to, set an intention with your ancestors and the part represented by the crystal.	Если хотите, определите намерение своих предков и части, представленной кристаллом.	If you would like to, set an intention with your ancestors and the part represented by the crystal.
When that feels complete, bring your awareness to your breath, and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	When that feels complete, bring your awareness to your breath, and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	Когда вы почувствуете, что это завершено, сосредоточьте свое внимание на своем дыхании и просто дышите, возвращаясь в этот момент и пространство.	When that feels complete, bring your awareness to your breath, and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.
Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Медленно откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Кристальная пещера с вопросами по журналу предков	Exercise 2: Crystal Cave with the Ancestors Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Crystal Cave with the Ancestors meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Crystal Cave with the Ancestors meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили Хрустальную пещеру с медитацией «Предки» и написали быстрый «Захват журнала», потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое исследование, ответив на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Crystal Cave with the Ancestors meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
What was your experience with your ancestors?	What was your experience with your ancestors?	Какой у вас был опыт общения с предками?	What was your experience with your ancestors?
Which part did you befriend?	Which part did you befriend?	С какой частью вы подружились?	Which part did you befriend?
What did you learn from the part?	What did you learn from the part?	Что вы узнали из этой роли?	What did you learn from the part?
How has what you learned impacted how you view this part?	How has what you learned impacted how you view this part?	Как то, что вы узнали, повлияло на ваше отношение к этой части?	How has what you learned impacted how you view this part?
What would the part rather do than protect you in the way that it does?	What would the part rather do than protect you in the way that it does?	Что эта часть предпочла бы делать, чем защищать вас так, как она это делает?	What would the part rather do than protect you in the way that it does?
Describe the crystal given to you by the ancestor that represents this part?	Describe the crystal given to you by the ancestor that represents this part?	Опишите кристалл, данный вам предком и олицетворяющий эту часть?	Describe the crystal given to you by the ancestor that represents this part?
Who were the two ancestors? Describe them.	Who were the two ancestors? Describe them.	Кем были два предка? Опишите их.	Who were the two ancestors? Describe them.
Exercise 3: Deepening the Relationship	Exercise 3: Deepening the Relationship	Упражнение 3: Углубление отношений	Exercise 3: Deepening the Relationship
How can you deepen the relationship with the part you met with in the cave?	How can you deepen the relationship with the part you met with in the cave?	Как можно углубить отношения с той частью, с которой вы встретились в пещере?	How can you deepen the relationship with the part you met with in the cave?
How might your ancestors assist you in deepening the relationship with the part?	How might your ancestors assist you in deepening the relationship with the part?	Как ваши предки могли бы помочь вам в углублении отношений с этой частью?	How might your ancestors assist you in deepening the relationship with the part?
How will you deepen your relationship with your ancestors?	How will you deepen your relationship with your ancestors?	Как вы собираетесь углубить свои отношения со своими предками?	How will you deepen your relationship with your ancestors?
CHAPTER 7	CHAPTER 7	ГЛАВА 7	CHAPTER 7
Polarization Picnic	Polarization Picnic	Поляризационный пикник	Polarization Picnic
Parts with Opposing Views	Parts with Opposing Views	Части с противоположными взглядами	Parts with Opposing Views
Survive: “I can’t believe you’re even considering closing your therapy practice. What are you thinking? How will you make it? You’ll starve. You need to be rational about this. Why change what’s working? Just leave well enough alone.”	Survive: “I can’t believe you’re even considering closing your therapy practice. What are you thinking? How will you make it? You’ll starve. You need to be rational about this. Why change what’s working? Just leave well enough alone.”	Выжить: «Я не могу поверить, что ты вообще подумываешь о закрытии своей терапевтической практики. О чем ты думаешь? Как ты это сделаешь? Вы будете голодать. Вы должны подходить к этому рационально. Зачем менять то, что работает? Просто оставьте в покое.	Survive: “I can’t believe you’re even considering closing your therapy practice. What are you thinking? How will you make it? You’ll starve. You need to be rational about this. Why change what’s working? Just leave well enough alone.”
Thrive: “You can’t keep working at this pace. You’re trying to maintain a full-time practice and become a trainer. It’s like you’re working two full-time jobs. This is killing you. You can’t hold on to your old life and create the new one at the same time. If you’re worried about finances, don’t. You’ll be fine.”	Thrive: “You can’t keep working at this pace. You’re trying to maintain a full-time practice and become a trainer. It’s like you’re working two full-time jobs. This is killing you. You can’t hold on to your old life and create the new one at the same time. If you’re worried about finances, don’t. You’ll be fine.”	Thrive: «Вы не можете продолжать работать в таком темпе. Вы пытаетесь заниматься постоянно и стать тренером. Это похоже на то, что вы работаете на двух работах полный рабочий день. Это убивает тебя. Вы не можете одновременно держаться за свою старую жизнь и создавать новую. Если вы беспокоитесь о финансах, не беспокойтесь. С тобой все будет в порядке.	Thrive: “You can’t keep working at this pace. You’re trying to maintain a full-time practice and become a trainer. It’s like you’re working two full-time jobs. This is killing you. You can’t hold on to your old life and create the new one at the same time. If you’re worried about finances, don’t. You’ll be fine.”
Survive: “It won’t be fine. Bills don’t get paid by themselves. We don’t have a crystal ball. There’s no guarantee this trainer thing will work out. We need to stick with what we know. You know what you’re doing works. You’ve spent years building your practice. Don’t walk away. And what about your clients? They need you.”	Survive: “It won’t be fine. Bills don’t get paid by themselves. We don’t have a crystal ball. There’s no guarantee this trainer thing will work out. We need to stick with what we know. You know what you’re doing works. You’ve spent years building your practice. Don’t walk away. And what about your clients? They need you.”	Выжить: «Это не будет хорошо. Счета не оплачиваются сами по себе. У нас нет хрустального шара. Нет никакой гарантии, что этот тренажер сработает. Нам нужно придерживаться того, что мы знаем. Вы знаете, что то, что вы делаете, работает. Вы потратили годы на создание своей практики. Не уходи. А как насчет ваших клиентов? Ты им нужен.	Survive: “It won’t be fine. Bills don’t get paid by themselves. We don’t have a crystal ball. There’s no guarantee this trainer thing will work out. We need to stick with what we know. You know what you’re doing works. You’ve spent years building your practice. Don’t walk away. And what about your clients? They need you.”
Thrive: “Refuse to move in fear. Survive’s decisions are based on fear. Trust the plan. You said you wanted to build a flourishing practice focusing on consultation, training, workshops/retreats, writing, and speaking. I believe it will be more successful than your therapy practice. To make this dream a reality, you have to close your practice. That’s the only way.”	Thrive: “Refuse to move in fear. Survive’s decisions are based on fear. Trust the plan. You said you wanted to build a flourishing practice focusing on consultation, training, workshops/retreats, writing, and speaking. I believe it will be more successful than your therapy practice. To make this dream a reality, you have to close your practice. That’s the only way.”	Процветание: «Отказывайтесь двигаться в страхе. Решения Survive основаны на страхе. Доверьтесь плану. Вы сказали, что хотите создать процветающую практику, сосредоточенную на консультациях, обучении, семинарах/ретритах, письме и устных выступлениях. Я верю, что это будет более успешным, чем ваша терапевтическая практика. Чтобы воплотить эту мечту в реальность, вам придется закрыть свою практику. Это единственный путь».	Thrive: “Refuse to move in fear. Survive’s decisions are based on fear. Trust the plan. You said you wanted to build a flourishing practice focusing on consultation, training, workshops/retreats, writing, and speaking. I believe it will be more successful than your therapy practice. To make this dream a reality, you have to close your practice. That’s the only way.”
Survive: “Yeah, yeah, yeah! But that’s all future promise that may or may not happen. Please don’t throw away what you’ve worked so hard to create. You have been doing this for 10 years and you want to throw it all away for the unknown. That’s foolish!”	Survive: “Yeah, yeah, yeah! But that’s all future promise that may or may not happen. Please don’t throw away what you’ve worked so hard to create. You have been doing this for 10 years and you want to throw it all away for the unknown. That’s foolish!”	Выжить: «Да, да, да! Но это все будущие обещания, которые могут произойти, а могут и не произойти. Пожалуйста, не выбрасывайте то, над созданием чего вы так усердно работали. Вы занимаетесь этим уже 10 лет и хотите бросить все это ради неизвестности. Это глупо!»	Survive: “Yeah, yeah, yeah! But that’s all future promise that may or may not happen. Please don’t throw away what you’ve worked so hard to create. You have been doing this for 10 years and you want to throw it all away for the unknown. That’s foolish!”
Thrive: “We’ve taken risks before and reaped great benefits. We took a risk when you left your job as a hospital social worker to open your practice, and look what we built. Survive tried to convince you not to leave the comforts of that job too. Now that this has become comfortable, he doesn’t want you to aim higher.”	Thrive: “We’ve taken risks before and reaped great benefits. We took a risk when you left your job as a hospital social worker to open your practice, and look what we built. Survive tried to convince you not to leave the comforts of that job too. Now that this has become comfortable, he doesn’t want you to aim higher.”	Процветание: «Раньше мы рисковали и получали большие выгоды. Мы пошли на риск, когда вы оставили работу социального работника в больнице, чтобы открыть свою практику, и посмотрите, что мы создали. Survive пытался убедить и вас не оставлять комфорт этой работы. Теперь, когда это стало комфортным, он не хочет, чтобы вы стремились к более высоким целям».	Thrive: “We’ve taken risks before and reaped great benefits. We took a risk when you left your job as a hospital social worker to open your practice, and look what we built. Survive tried to convince you not to leave the comforts of that job too. Now that this has become comfortable, he doesn’t want you to aim higher.”
Survive: “I think you’re making a mistake if you listen to Thrive. He is a risk-taker, and great, the last time worked out, but we struggled for a time before it worked out. We’re comfortable; things are stable and profitable. Why start over again? Why? I say we leave things as they are.”	Survive: “I think you’re making a mistake if you listen to Thrive. He is a risk-taker, and great, the last time worked out, but we struggled for a time before it worked out. We’re comfortable; things are stable and profitable. Why start over again? Why? I say we leave things as they are.”	Survive: «Я думаю, что ты совершаешь ошибку, если слушаешь Thrive. Он любит рисковать, и это здорово, в прошлый раз все получилось, но мы какое-то время боролись, прежде чем это получилось. Нам комфортно; дела идут стабильно и прибыльно. Зачем начинать заново? Почему? Я говорю, что мы оставим все как есть».	Survive: “I think you’re making a mistake if you listen to Thrive. He is a risk-taker, and great, the last time worked out, but we struggled for a time before it worked out. We’re comfortable; things are stable and profitable. Why start over again? Why? I say we leave things as they are.”
Thrive: “We’ve already done the private practice thing. It’s time to spread our wings and have a greater impact on the field. You believe in IFS therapy and want to bring it to as many people as possible. I can help you to do that. Sure, it will be uncomfortable for a while, but the discomfort will be brief, just as it was when you were building your private practice. I say close your psychotherapy practice and focus on becoming an IFS trainer and consultant.”	Thrive: “We’ve already done the private practice thing. It’s time to spread our wings and have a greater impact on the field. You believe in IFS therapy and want to bring it to as many people as possible. I can help you to do that. Sure, it will be uncomfortable for a while, but the discomfort will be brief, just as it was when you were building your private practice. I say close your psychotherapy practice and focus on becoming an IFS trainer and consultant.”	Thrive: «Мы уже занялись частной практикой. Пришло время расправить крылья и оказать большее влияние на поле. Вы верите в терапию IFS и хотите донести ее до как можно большего числа людей. Я могу помочь вам сделать это. Конечно, какое-то время вам будет некомфортно, но дискомфорт будет кратковременным, точно так же, как это было, когда вы строили свою частную практику. Я советую закрыть свою психотерапевтическую практику и сосредоточиться на том, чтобы стать тренером и консультантом IFS».	Thrive: “We’ve already done the private practice thing. It’s time to spread our wings and have a greater impact on the field. You believe in IFS therapy and want to bring it to as many people as possible. I can help you to do that. Sure, it will be uncomfortable for a while, but the discomfort will be brief, just as it was when you were building your private practice. I say close your psychotherapy practice and focus on becoming an IFS trainer and consultant.”
Have you ever had two voices in your head telling you to do two completely different things? Well, that was my experience with Survive and Thrive. I had a successful private practice, and I was being mentored toward becoming an IFS trainer. I came to a point in the process where exhaustion was setting in because, essentially, I had two full-time jobs. I found myself at a crossroads. It was no longer possible for me to continue with both in the same manner. I found that the trainer track required much more from me than I could have predicted, and I was committed to giving this new career path my full attention and effort. So I was faced with a decision to close my psychotherapy practice or significantly reduce my caseload to continue my pursuit of becoming the first Black IFS Solo lead trainer.	Have you ever had two voices in your head telling you to do two completely different things? Well, that was my experience with Survive and Thrive. I had a successful private practice, and I was being mentored toward becoming an IFS trainer. I came to a point in the process where exhaustion was setting in because, essentially, I had two full-time jobs. I found myself at a crossroads. It was no longer possible for me to continue with both in the same manner. I found that the trainer track required much more from me than I could have predicted, and I was committed to giving this new career path my full attention and effort. So I was faced with a decision to close my psychotherapy practice or significantly reduce my caseload to continue my pursuit of becoming the first Black IFS Solo lead trainer.	Были ли у вас когда-нибудь два голоса в голове, говорящие вам сделать два совершенно разных дела? Ну, это был мой опыт работы с Survive and Thrive. У меня была успешная частная практика, и меня готовили стать тренером IFS. Я подошел к моменту, когда наступило утомление, потому что, по сути, у меня было две работы с полной занятостью. Я оказался на распутье. Я больше не мог продолжать делать то и другое одинаково. Я обнаружил, что тренерская карьера требует от меня гораздо большего, чем я мог предсказать, и я был полон решимости уделить этому новому карьерному пути все свое внимание и усилия. Поэтому я столкнулся с решением закрыть свою психотерапевтическую практику или значительно сократить нагрузку, чтобы продолжить стремление стать первым ведущим тренером Black IFS Solo.	Have you ever had two voices in your head telling you to do two completely different things? Well, that was my experience with Survive and Thrive. I had a successful private practice, and I was being mentored toward becoming an IFS trainer. I came to a point in the process where exhaustion was setting in because, essentially, I had two full-time jobs. I found myself at a crossroads. It was no longer possible for me to continue with both in the same manner. I found that the trainer track required much more from me than I could have predicted, and I was committed to giving this new career path my full attention and effort. So I was faced with a decision to close my psychotherapy practice or significantly reduce my caseload to continue my pursuit of becoming the first Black IFS Solo lead trainer.
Thrive and Survive continued to bicker and were unwilling to compromise. They each held that their position was the best solution. When one tried to convince me to side with them, the other strongly opposed and argued for their point of view. This dynamic is referred to as polarization.	Thrive and Survive continued to bicker and were unwilling to compromise. They each held that their position was the best solution. When one tried to convince me to side with them, the other strongly opposed and argued for their point of view. This dynamic is referred to as polarization.	Thrive и Survive продолжали ссориться и не желали идти на компромисс. Каждый из них считал, что их позиция — лучшее решение. Когда один пытался убедить меня встать на их сторону, другой категорически возражал и отстаивал свою точку зрения. Эта динамика называется поляризацией.	Thrive and Survive continued to bicker and were unwilling to compromise. They each held that their position was the best solution. When one tried to convince me to side with them, the other strongly opposed and argued for their point of view. This dynamic is referred to as polarization.
IFS CONCEPT 1: POLARIZATION	IFS CONCEPT 1: POLARIZATION	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: ПОЛЯРИЗАЦИЯ	IFS CONCEPT 1: POLARIZATION
Polarization is what happens when two or more parts hold differing and sometimes opposite positions. Often these parts have little access to Self. They are so focused on their viewpoint and not allowing the other part to take over that they do not notice the availability of Self. Their hyper-focus on preventing the other from taking over keeps them in a vicious loop of maintaining balance by not giving in or even considering a compromise.	Polarization is what happens when two or more parts hold differing and sometimes opposite positions. Often these parts have little access to Self. They are so focused on their viewpoint and not allowing the other part to take over that they do not notice the availability of Self. Their hyper-focus on preventing the other from taking over keeps them in a vicious loop of maintaining balance by not giving in or even considering a compromise.	Поляризация — это то, что происходит, когда две или более частей занимают разные, а иногда и противоположные позиции. Часто эти части имеют ограниченный доступ к «Я». Они настолько сосредоточены на своей точке зрения и не позволяют другой части взять верх, что не замечают присутствия «Я». Их чрезмерная сосредоточенность на предотвращении захвата власти другим держит их в порочном круге поддержания баланса, не сдаваясь и даже не рассматривая компромисс.	Polarization is what happens when two or more parts hold differing and sometimes opposite positions. Often these parts have little access to Self. They are so focused on their viewpoint and not allowing the other part to take over that they do not notice the availability of Self. Their hyper-focus on preventing the other from taking over keeps them in a vicious loop of maintaining balance by not giving in or even considering a compromise.
Experiencing polarization is common, since most of our parts are polarized with another part. The polarization can be experienced as fear, dislike, or disagreement between parts. The most common polarizations are between protectors, such as manager/firefighter, manager/manager, and firefighter/firefighter. However parts can also be polarized with exiles. Polarized protectors are like people who hold differing views and opinions. Protectors do not want the opposing view to dominate the system, so they do their best to ensure that their position prevails. These polarized parts function usually to protect a vulnerable part or exile, and they can serve as distractions from deeper emotions or pain. Ultimately, these parts want the same outcome, but their tactics differ. The goal is to attend to each view equally to understand what parts need and what they are attempting to do.	Experiencing polarization is common, since most of our parts are polarized with another part. The polarization can be experienced as fear, dislike, or disagreement between parts. The most common polarizations are between protectors, such as manager/firefighter, manager/manager, and firefighter/firefighter. However parts can also be polarized with exiles. Polarized protectors are like people who hold differing views and opinions. Protectors do not want the opposing view to dominate the system, so they do their best to ensure that their position prevails. These polarized parts function usually to protect a vulnerable part or exile, and they can serve as distractions from deeper emotions or pain. Ultimately, these parts want the same outcome, but their tactics differ. The goal is to attend to each view equally to understand what parts need and what they are attempting to do.	Поляризация является обычным явлением, поскольку большинство наших частей поляризованы с другой частью. Поляризация может переживаться как страх, неприязнь или разногласия между частями. Наиболее распространенная поляризация наблюдается между защитниками, такими как менеджер/пожарный, менеджер/менеджер и пожарный/пожарный. Однако части также могут быть поляризованы изгнанниками. Поляризованные защитники подобны людям, придерживающимся разных взглядов и мнений. Защитники не хотят, чтобы в системе доминировала противоположная точка зрения, поэтому они делают все возможное, чтобы их позиция возобладала. Эти поляризованные части обычно защищают уязвимую часть или изгнание и могут отвлекать от более глубоких эмоций или боли. В конечном счете, эти части хотят одного и того же результата, но их тактика различается. Цель состоит в том, чтобы одинаково внимательно относиться к каждому представлению, чтобы понять, что нужно частям и что они пытаются сделать.	Experiencing polarization is common, since most of our parts are polarized with another part. The polarization can be experienced as fear, dislike, or disagreement between parts. The most common polarizations are between protectors, such as manager/firefighter, manager/manager, and firefighter/firefighter. However parts can also be polarized with exiles. Polarized protectors are like people who hold differing views and opinions. Protectors do not want the opposing view to dominate the system, so they do their best to ensure that their position prevails. These polarized parts function usually to protect a vulnerable part or exile, and they can serve as distractions from deeper emotions or pain. Ultimately, these parts want the same outcome, but their tactics differ. The goal is to attend to each view equally to understand what parts need and what they are attempting to do.
IFS CONCEPT 2: WORKING WITH POLARIZED PARTS	IFS CONCEPT 2: WORKING WITH POLARIZED PARTS	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: РАБОТА С ПОЛЯРИЗОВАННЫМИ ЧАСТЯМИ	IFS CONCEPT 2: WORKING WITH POLARIZED PARTS
The first step in working with a polarization is identifying the parts involved. We want to understand the relationship between the polarized parts. Is one part fearful of another? Are parts in a struggle with one another? Are parts reacting to each other in some way? We want to identify the parts on either side of the polarization, keeping in mind there can be more than two parts involved in a polarization; in that case, a coalition of parts exists on either side.	The first step in working with a polarization is identifying the parts involved. We want to understand the relationship between the polarized parts. Is one part fearful of another? Are parts in a struggle with one another? Are parts reacting to each other in some way? We want to identify the parts on either side of the polarization, keeping in mind there can be more than two parts involved in a polarization; in that case, a coalition of parts exists on either side.	Первым шагом в работе с поляризацией является определение участвующих в ней частей. Мы хотим понять взаимоотношения между поляризованными частями. Боится ли одна часть другой? Части борются друг с другом? Части как-то реагируют друг на друга? Мы хотим идентифицировать части по обе стороны от поляризации, имея в виду, что в поляризации может участвовать более двух частей; в этом случае с обеих сторон существует коалиция частей.	The first step in working with a polarization is identifying the parts involved. We want to understand the relationship between the polarized parts. Is one part fearful of another? Are parts in a struggle with one another? Are parts reacting to each other in some way? We want to identify the parts on either side of the polarization, keeping in mind there can be more than two parts involved in a polarization; in that case, a coalition of parts exists on either side.
As an example, a coalition of people-pleasing parts could include a part that goes along to get along, another part that keeps quiet as a way to please others, and another part that allows others to use it as a doormat. The other side of the polarization may include a coalition of parts that get angry to protect. This coalition has a part that gets angry at the people-pleasing parts, another part that gets angry at the object of the people-pleasing parts, and a third part that criticizes everyone involved. Remember, the biggest fear of polarized parts, or coalitions of parts, is the other side dominating and taking over. It is important when working with a polarization to address this fear by letting each part know that you will not allow the other side to take over and you will hear from each part.	As an example, a coalition of people-pleasing parts could include a part that goes along to get along, another part that keeps quiet as a way to please others, and another part that allows others to use it as a doormat. The other side of the polarization may include a coalition of parts that get angry to protect. This coalition has a part that gets angry at the people-pleasing parts, another part that gets angry at the object of the people-pleasing parts, and a third part that criticizes everyone involved. Remember, the biggest fear of polarized parts, or coalitions of parts, is the other side dominating and taking over. It is important when working with a polarization to address this fear by letting each part know that you will not allow the other side to take over and you will hear from each part.	Например, коалиция частей, угодных людям, может включать часть, которая идет навстречу, чтобы ладить, другую часть, которая хранит молчание, чтобы доставить удовольствие другим, и третью часть, которая позволяет другим использовать ее как тряпку. Другая сторона поляризации может включать в себя коалицию сторон, которые злятся, чтобы защитить. В этой коалиции есть часть, которая злится на части, угодные людям, другая часть, которая злится на объект частей, угодных людям, и третья часть, которая критикует всех участников. Помните: самый большой страх перед поляризованными частями или коалициями частей – это доминирование и захват власти другой стороны. При работе с поляризацией важно справиться с этим страхом, давая понять каждой части, что вы не позволите другой стороне взять верх и что вы услышите от каждой части.	As an example, a coalition of people-pleasing parts could include a part that goes along to get along, another part that keeps quiet as a way to please others, and another part that allows others to use it as a doormat. The other side of the polarization may include a coalition of parts that get angry to protect. This coalition has a part that gets angry at the people-pleasing parts, another part that gets angry at the object of the people-pleasing parts, and a third part that criticizes everyone involved. Remember, the biggest fear of polarized parts, or coalitions of parts, is the other side dominating and taking over. It is important when working with a polarization to address this fear by letting each part know that you will not allow the other side to take over and you will hear from each part.
Again, when we begin working with a polarization, we consider every part involved. (To simplify the process, I will use the example of two polarized parts instead of a coalition; however, the same steps apply when working with a coalition.)	Again, when we begin working with a polarization, we consider every part involved. (To simplify the process, I will use the example of two polarized parts instead of a coalition; however, the same steps apply when working with a coalition.)	Опять же, когда мы начинаем работать с поляризацией, мы рассматриваем каждую задействованную часть. (Чтобы упростить процесс, я буду использовать пример двух поляризованных частей вместо коалиции; однако те же шаги применимы и при работе с коалицией.)	Again, when we begin working with a polarization, we consider every part involved. (To simplify the process, I will use the example of two polarized parts instead of a coalition; however, the same steps apply when working with a coalition.)
First, we want to focus on both sides of the polarization at the same time. To help us do this, we can notice how each part shows up in or around the body, we can draw each part on a sheet of paper, or we can imagine holding one part in each hand.	First, we want to focus on both sides of the polarization at the same time. To help us do this, we can notice how each part shows up in or around the body, we can draw each part on a sheet of paper, or we can imagine holding one part in each hand.	Во-первых, мы хотим сосредоточиться на обеих сторонах поляризации одновременно. Чтобы помочь нам в этом, мы можем заметить, как каждая часть проявляется внутри или вокруг тела, мы можем нарисовать каждую часть на листе бумаги или представить, что держим по одной части в каждой руке.	First, we want to focus on both sides of the polarization at the same time. To help us do this, we can notice how each part shows up in or around the body, we can draw each part on a sheet of paper, or we can imagine holding one part in each hand.
Let’s take the example of noticing how each part shows up in or around the body. I noticed that Thrive showed up outside of my body on the left side, impatient and eager to move forward. He used his hands and body to punctuate his words. Survive expressed as a nervous pit in my stomach. After sensing how each part reveals itself, we want to notice how we feel toward each part. We might notice parts that align with either side of the polarized pair or parts that have an agenda. If those parts are present, we ask them to step back. Once those parts unblend, we want to notice how we feel toward each part of the polarization again. When we unblend from parts, what remains is Self. We continue to check how we feel toward the parts until we have Self energy toward each part of the polarization.	Let’s take the example of noticing how each part shows up in or around the body. I noticed that Thrive showed up outside of my body on the left side, impatient and eager to move forward. He used his hands and body to punctuate his words. Survive expressed as a nervous pit in my stomach. After sensing how each part reveals itself, we want to notice how we feel toward each part. We might notice parts that align with either side of the polarized pair or parts that have an agenda. If those parts are present, we ask them to step back. Once those parts unblend, we want to notice how we feel toward each part of the polarization again. When we unblend from parts, what remains is Self. We continue to check how we feel toward the parts until we have Self energy toward each part of the polarization.	Давайте возьмем пример наблюдения за тем, как каждая часть проявляется внутри или вокруг тела. Я заметил, что Трайв появился снаружи моего тела с левой стороны, нетерпеливый и жаждущий двигаться вперед. Он использовал руки и тело, чтобы подчеркнуть свои слова. «Выжить» выражается в виде нервной ямки в животе. Почувствовав, как раскрывается каждая часть, мы хотим отметить, что мы чувствуем по отношению к каждой части. Мы можем заметить части, которые совпадают с любой из сторон поляризованной пары, или части, имеющие определенную повестку дня. Если эти части присутствуют, мы просим их отступить. Как только эти части сольются, мы хотим снова обратить внимание на то, как мы относимся к каждой части поляризации. Когда мы отделяемся от частей, остается только Я. Мы продолжаем проверять, как мы чувствуем себя по отношению к частям, пока у нас не появится энергия Самости по отношению к каждой части поляризации.	Let’s take the example of noticing how each part shows up in or around the body. I noticed that Thrive showed up outside of my body on the left side, impatient and eager to move forward. He used his hands and body to punctuate his words. Survive expressed as a nervous pit in my stomach. After sensing how each part reveals itself, we want to notice how we feel toward each part. We might notice parts that align with either side of the polarized pair or parts that have an agenda. If those parts are present, we ask them to step back. Once those parts unblend, we want to notice how we feel toward each part of the polarization again. When we unblend from parts, what remains is Self. We continue to check how we feel toward the parts until we have Self energy toward each part of the polarization.
If we feel one or more of the qualities of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), we can energetically extend that quality of Self to one or both parts.	If we feel one or more of the qualities of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), we can energetically extend that quality of Self to one or both parts.	Если мы чувствуем одно или несколько качеств «Я» (сострадание, любопытство, спокойствие, уверенность, творчество, связанность, смелость или ясность), мы можем энергетически распространить это качество «Я» на одну или обе части.	If we feel one or more of the qualities of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), we can energetically extend that quality of Self to one or both parts.
If we feel something other than these qualities, it means that another part is present, so we ask it to step back (unblend).	If we feel something other than these qualities, it means that another part is present, so we ask it to step back (unblend).	Если мы чувствуем что-то иное, чем эти качества, значит, присутствует другая часть, поэтому мы просим ее отойти (разъединиться).	If we feel something other than these qualities, it means that another part is present, so we ask it to step back (unblend).
After extending qualities of Self, we ask permission to get to know each side of the polarization. This means we ask each side not to blend or take over while getting to know the other side. If one side has more energy, that may be the part we talk to first. If the energy of the parts is similar, ask the parts who would like to share first, reminding them that each will have their turn.	After extending qualities of Self, we ask permission to get to know each side of the polarization. This means we ask each side not to blend or take over while getting to know the other side. If one side has more energy, that may be the part we talk to first. If the energy of the parts is similar, ask the parts who would like to share first, reminding them that each will have their turn.	Расширив качества «Я», мы просим разрешения узнать каждую сторону поляризации. Это означает, что мы просим каждую сторону не смешиваться и не брать верх во время знакомства с другой стороной. Если у одной стороны больше энергии, возможно, именно с ней мы поговорим в первую очередь. Если энергии частей схожи, спросите те части, которые хотели бы поделиться первыми, напоминая им, что у каждой будет своя очередь.	After extending qualities of Self, we ask permission to get to know each side of the polarization. This means we ask each side not to blend or take over while getting to know the other side. If one side has more energy, that may be the part we talk to first. If the energy of the parts is similar, ask the parts who would like to share first, reminding them that each will have their turn.
In getting to know each part, we want to learn their role in the system. What do they do, and what are they trying to accomplish? Since all parts have positive intentions, we know these parts are attempting to help, and we want to discover their positive intentions. We want to know how this struggle is working for them. Oftentimes, struggle between the parts does not result in them getting what they want. Asking these questions helps the parts to see the results of their efforts. They may not have noticed that they’re not getting the outcomes they want because they have been too focused on the struggle with each other.	In getting to know each part, we want to learn their role in the system. What do they do, and what are they trying to accomplish? Since all parts have positive intentions, we know these parts are attempting to help, and we want to discover their positive intentions. We want to know how this struggle is working for them. Oftentimes, struggle between the parts does not result in them getting what they want. Asking these questions helps the parts to see the results of their efforts. They may not have noticed that they’re not getting the outcomes they want because they have been too focused on the struggle with each other.	Познакомившись с каждой частью, мы хотим узнать их роль в системе. Что они делают и чего пытаются достичь? Поскольку все части имеют позитивные намерения, мы знаем, что эти части пытаются помочь, и мы хотим обнаружить их позитивные намерения. Мы хотим знать, как эта борьба работает для них. Часто борьба между частями не приводит к тому, что они получают то, что хотят. Задание этих вопросов помогает частям увидеть результаты своих усилий. Они, возможно, не заметили, что не получают желаемых результатов, потому что были слишком сосредоточены на борьбе друг с другом.	In getting to know each part, we want to learn their role in the system. What do they do, and what are they trying to accomplish? Since all parts have positive intentions, we know these parts are attempting to help, and we want to discover their positive intentions. We want to know how this struggle is working for them. Oftentimes, struggle between the parts does not result in them getting what they want. Asking these questions helps the parts to see the results of their efforts. They may not have noticed that they’re not getting the outcomes they want because they have been too focused on the struggle with each other.
After getting to know one side of the polarization, spend time asking the same questions of the other part. In this way, each side gets to learn how the other side is trying to help and protect you. When the parts realize each other’s role and that neither is getting their desired outcome, they usually soften and calm.	After getting to know one side of the polarization, spend time asking the same questions of the other part. In this way, each side gets to learn how the other side is trying to help and protect you. When the parts realize each other’s role and that neither is getting their desired outcome, they usually soften and calm.	Познакомившись с одной стороной поляризации, потратьте время, задавая те же вопросы другой стороне. Таким образом, каждая сторона узнает, как другая сторона пытается помочь и защитить вас. Когда стороны осознают роль друг друга и что ни одна из них не достигает желаемого результата, они обычно смягчаются и успокаиваются.	After getting to know one side of the polarization, spend time asking the same questions of the other part. In this way, each side gets to learn how the other side is trying to help and protect you. When the parts realize each other’s role and that neither is getting their desired outcome, they usually soften and calm.
Next, we want to get curious about whom the polarized parts protect. Often, we discover they are protecting the same exiled part. Even though they may be using different methods and strategies, they are doing the same job. This revelation can open the parts to trying something new instead of continuing in their struggle. We want to take time to understand what each part is afraid would happen if they stopped protecting in the way they do. We will find our parts protect ferociously because they do not want us to experience the pain the exile is holding. When we know their fears and who they protect, we can offer to heal the one they protect if they are interested and give permission. If permission is granted, we can begin to build a Self-to-part relationship with the exile and heal it using the steps in Chapter 10.	Next, we want to get curious about whom the polarized parts protect. Often, we discover they are protecting the same exiled part. Even though they may be using different methods and strategies, they are doing the same job. This revelation can open the parts to trying something new instead of continuing in their struggle. We want to take time to understand what each part is afraid would happen if they stopped protecting in the way they do. We will find our parts protect ferociously because they do not want us to experience the pain the exile is holding. When we know their fears and who they protect, we can offer to heal the one they protect if they are interested and give permission. If permission is granted, we can begin to build a Self-to-part relationship with the exile and heal it using the steps in Chapter 10.	Далее мы хотим поинтересоваться, кого защищают поляризованные части. Часто мы обнаруживаем, что они защищают одну и ту же изгнанную часть. Хотя они могут использовать разные методы и стратегии, они выполняют одну и ту же работу. Это откровение может открыть частям возможность попробовать что-то новое вместо того, чтобы продолжать борьбу. Нам нужно время, чтобы понять, чего боится каждая часть, если они перестанут защищать так, как они это делают. Мы обнаружим, что наши части яростно защищаются, потому что они не хотят, чтобы мы испытали боль, которую несет изгнанник. Когда мы знаем их страхи и то, кого они защищают, мы можем предложить исцелить того, кого они защищают, если они заинтересованы, и дать разрешение. Если разрешение будет дано, мы можем начать строить отношения «Я-расставание» с изгнанником и исцелять его, используя шаги, описанные в Главе 10.	Next, we want to get curious about whom the polarized parts protect. Often, we discover they are protecting the same exiled part. Even though they may be using different methods and strategies, they are doing the same job. This revelation can open the parts to trying something new instead of continuing in their struggle. We want to take time to understand what each part is afraid would happen if they stopped protecting in the way they do. We will find our parts protect ferociously because they do not want us to experience the pain the exile is holding. When we know their fears and who they protect, we can offer to heal the one they protect if they are interested and give permission. If permission is granted, we can begin to build a Self-to-part relationship with the exile and heal it using the steps in Chapter 10.
It is important to note that even after getting polarized parts to relax and calm, they will not stop protecting until the one they protect is healed (unburdened). However, they now have a relationship with Self that they did not have previously. We can ask parts to trust Self to address the problem that concerns them. After the exile is unburdened, the polarized parts can take on different roles in the system because they will not need to protect the exile in the same manner after it is healed. We can have them talk and listen to each other with Self as a mediator. This will help them decide on new roles that could somehow include working together as allies instead of adversaries fearing domination by the other.	It is important to note that even after getting polarized parts to relax and calm, they will not stop protecting until the one they protect is healed (unburdened). However, they now have a relationship with Self that they did not have previously. We can ask parts to trust Self to address the problem that concerns them. After the exile is unburdened, the polarized parts can take on different roles in the system because they will not need to protect the exile in the same manner after it is healed. We can have them talk and listen to each other with Self as a mediator. This will help them decide on new roles that could somehow include working together as allies instead of adversaries fearing domination by the other.	Важно отметить, что даже после того, как поляризованные части расслабятся и успокоятся, они не перестанут защищать, пока тот, кого они защищают, не исцелится (освободится от бремени). Однако теперь у них есть отношения с «Я», которых у них не было раньше. Мы можем попросить части довериться Себе в решении проблемы, которая их беспокоит. После того, как изгнанник освобожден от бремени, поляризованные части могут брать на себя разные роли в системе, поскольку им не нужно будет защищать изгнанника таким же образом после его исцеления. Мы можем заставить их говорить и слушать друг друга, используя «Я» в качестве посредника. Это поможет им определиться с новыми ролями, которые могут каким-то образом включать совместную работу в качестве союзников, а не противников, опасающихся доминирования друг друга.	It is important to note that even after getting polarized parts to relax and calm, they will not stop protecting until the one they protect is healed (unburdened). However, they now have a relationship with Self that they did not have previously. We can ask parts to trust Self to address the problem that concerns them. After the exile is unburdened, the polarized parts can take on different roles in the system because they will not need to protect the exile in the same manner after it is healed. We can have them talk and listen to each other with Self as a mediator. This will help them decide on new roles that could somehow include working together as allies instead of adversaries fearing domination by the other.
Case Vignette:	Case Vignette:	Виньетка по делу:	Case Vignette:
Go Along to Get Along vs. Bulldog	Go Along to Get Along vs. Bulldog	Иди, чтобы ладить против Бульдога	Go Along to Get Along vs. Bulldog
Angel is a 39-year-old, well-educated, successful female Nigerian immigrant working in international finance. She came to therapy for anxiety. She was experiencing constant worry, inability to focus on work, nervousness, sleeplessness, and irritability. She believed her symptoms were the result of racialized workplace trauma.	Angel is a 39-year-old, well-educated, successful female Nigerian immigrant working in international finance. She came to therapy for anxiety. She was experiencing constant worry, inability to focus on work, nervousness, sleeplessness, and irritability. She believed her symptoms were the result of racialized workplace trauma.	Анхель — 39-летняя, хорошо образованная, успешная иммигрантка из Нигерии, работающая в сфере международных финансов. Она пришла на терапию из-за тревоги. Она испытывала постоянное беспокойство, неспособность сосредоточиться на работе, нервозность, бессонницу и раздражительность. Она считала, что ее симптомы были результатом расовой травмы на рабочем месте.	Angel is a 39-year-old, well-educated, successful female Nigerian immigrant working in international finance. She came to therapy for anxiety. She was experiencing constant worry, inability to focus on work, nervousness, sleeplessness, and irritability. She believed her symptoms were the result of racialized workplace trauma.
In our session, Angel describes her immediate boss’s low and derogatory views of people of color. She shares that her boss constantly compares her to other Black employees she has managed in the past. Her boss gives what she considers compliments, but Angel experiences them as stressful microaggressions: for example, “You’re highly driven for a Black person,” or “You’re not lazy like the other Black women who’ve worked for me,” or “You’re a real pack mule when it comes to how many projects you can manage.”	In our session, Angel describes her immediate boss’s low and derogatory views of people of color. She shares that her boss constantly compares her to other Black employees she has managed in the past. Her boss gives what she considers compliments, but Angel experiences them as stressful microaggressions: for example, “You’re highly driven for a Black person,” or “You’re not lazy like the other Black women who’ve worked for me,” or “You’re a real pack mule when it comes to how many projects you can manage.”	На нашем сеансе Ангел описывает низкое и уничижительное отношение своего непосредственного начальника к цветным людям. Она рассказывает, что ее начальник постоянно сравнивает ее с другими чернокожими сотрудниками, которыми она руководила в прошлом. Ее начальник делает то, что она считает комплиментами, но Энджел воспринимает их как стрессовую микроагрессию: например: «Ты очень целеустремленна для чернокожего человека» или «Ты не ленива, как другие чернокожие женщины, которые работали на меня. или «Вы настоящий вьючный мул, когда дело касается количества проектов, которыми вы можете управлять».	In our session, Angel describes her immediate boss’s low and derogatory views of people of color. She shares that her boss constantly compares her to other Black employees she has managed in the past. Her boss gives what she considers compliments, but Angel experiences them as stressful microaggressions: for example, “You’re highly driven for a Black person,” or “You’re not lazy like the other Black women who’ve worked for me,” or “You’re a real pack mule when it comes to how many projects you can manage.”
Angel says that although her workplace was toxic to begin with, her anxiety became impossible to manage when she was overlooked for a promotion after doing the job for six months without a title or pay increase, and while possessing more education, experience, and qualifications than the person who was ultimately selected for the position. When I asked Angel about her experiences at work and her anxiety, I immediately met her polarized parts.	Angel says that although her workplace was toxic to begin with, her anxiety became impossible to manage when she was overlooked for a promotion after doing the job for six months without a title or pay increase, and while possessing more education, experience, and qualifications than the person who was ultimately selected for the position. When I asked Angel about her experiences at work and her anxiety, I immediately met her polarized parts.	Анхель говорит, что, хотя ее рабочее место с самого начала было токсичным, с ее тревогой стало невозможно справиться, когда ее упустили из виду при повышении по службе после шести месяцев работы без звания или повышения заработной платы, и при этом она обладала большим образованием, опытом и квалификацией, чем человек, который в конечном итоге был выбран на эту должность. Когда я спросил Энджел о ее переживаниях на работе и ее беспокойстве, я сразу же обнаружил ее поляризованные части.	Angel says that although her workplace was toxic to begin with, her anxiety became impossible to manage when she was overlooked for a promotion after doing the job for six months without a title or pay increase, and while possessing more education, experience, and qualifications than the person who was ultimately selected for the position. When I asked Angel about her experiences at work and her anxiety, I immediately met her polarized parts.
“I am by far the most qualified for the promotion. I hold degrees from two Ivy League universities. I spent six months doing the job required of the position. I’ve taken on every project my boss has offered, carrying a much higher workload than my co-workers. I want to say something about not getting the promotion, but it’s better not to rock the boat and ruin my chances for future promotions.”	“I am by far the most qualified for the promotion. I hold degrees from two Ivy League universities. I spent six months doing the job required of the position. I’ve taken on every project my boss has offered, carrying a much higher workload than my co-workers. I want to say something about not getting the promotion, but it’s better not to rock the boat and ruin my chances for future promotions.”	«Я, безусловно, наиболее квалифицирован для повышения. У меня есть степени двух университетов Лиги плюща. Я провел шесть месяцев, выполняя работу, необходимую для этой должности. Я брал на себя каждый проект, предложенный моим начальником, и брал на себя гораздо большую рабочую нагрузку, чем мои коллеги. Я хочу сказать кое-что о том, что не получил повышения, но лучше не раскачивать лодку и не разрушать свои шансы на будущее повышение».	“I am by far the most qualified for the promotion. I hold degrees from two Ivy League universities. I spent six months doing the job required of the position. I’ve taken on every project my boss has offered, carrying a much higher workload than my co-workers. I want to say something about not getting the promotion, but it’s better not to rock the boat and ruin my chances for future promotions.”
“What would you want to know from your boss?”	“What would you want to know from your boss?”	«Что бы вы хотели узнать от своего начальника?»	“What would you want to know from your boss?”
“I want to know what I can do to improve my chances for promotion. I know how to give people exactly what they want from me. All she needs to do is tell me, and I’ll deliver. But on the other hand, I deserve to know why I didn’t get the damn promotion. No one else works their ass off the way I do. I’ve been doing the job for six months! I want to storm into her office and demand the truth. I tolerated her racist comments and microaggressions. I’m tired of it! I thought this promotion was a sure way to get out from under her thumb and to work in a new division in another office.”	“I want to know what I can do to improve my chances for promotion. I know how to give people exactly what they want from me. All she needs to do is tell me, and I’ll deliver. But on the other hand, I deserve to know why I didn’t get the damn promotion. No one else works their ass off the way I do. I’ve been doing the job for six months! I want to storm into her office and demand the truth. I tolerated her racist comments and microaggressions. I’m tired of it! I thought this promotion was a sure way to get out from under her thumb and to work in a new division in another office.”	«Я хочу знать, что я могу сделать, чтобы улучшить свои шансы на повышение. Я знаю, как дать людям именно то, что они от меня хотят. Все, что ей нужно сделать, это сказать мне, и я доставлю. Но с другой стороны, я заслуживаю знать, почему я не получил чертово повышение. Никто больше не работает так, как я. Я работаю полгода! Я хочу ворваться в ее офис и потребовать правду. Я терпел ее расистские комментарии и микроагрессию. Я устал от этого! Я подумал, что это повышение — верный способ выйти из-под ее власти и работать в новом подразделении в другом офисе».	“I want to know what I can do to improve my chances for promotion. I know how to give people exactly what they want from me. All she needs to do is tell me, and I’ll deliver. But on the other hand, I deserve to know why I didn’t get the damn promotion. No one else works their ass off the way I do. I’ve been doing the job for six months! I want to storm into her office and demand the truth. I tolerated her racist comments and microaggressions. I’m tired of it! I thought this promotion was a sure way to get out from under her thumb and to work in a new division in another office.”
“Angel, I’m hearing that you’re torn between not making waves and wanting to demand answers. It also sounds like you feel slighted and angry after doing the job for six months, is that correct?”	“Angel, I’m hearing that you’re torn between not making waves and wanting to demand answers. It also sounds like you feel slighted and angry after doing the job for six months, is that correct?”	«Ангел, я слышал, что ты разрываешься между тем, чтобы не поднимать волну, и желанием потребовать ответов. Это также звучит так, будто вы чувствуете себя обиженным и злым после шести месяцев работы на работе, верно?»	“Angel, I’m hearing that you’re torn between not making waves and wanting to demand answers. It also sounds like you feel slighted and angry after doing the job for six months, is that correct?”
“Yes.” After a long pause she adds, “And no. I want to know why she didn’t promote the most qualified person on her team. I want to know if I’m wasting my time. But if I ask, I’m afraid I’ll never get promoted. I can wait. I will wait. Then I think, this is bullshit! I have worked hard and proven my value. Yet it is the white men on the team who get promoted. To add insult to being overlooked, she asked me to bring the white man who got promoted up to speed. I am so damn angry. I don’t know who I’m most angry with, her or myself.” Angel closes her eyes, shakes her head, and sighs in disbelief.	“Yes.” After a long pause she adds, “And no. I want to know why she didn’t promote the most qualified person on her team. I want to know if I’m wasting my time. But if I ask, I’m afraid I’ll never get promoted. I can wait. I will wait. Then I think, this is bullshit! I have worked hard and proven my value. Yet it is the white men on the team who get promoted. To add insult to being overlooked, she asked me to bring the white man who got promoted up to speed. I am so damn angry. I don’t know who I’m most angry with, her or myself.” Angel closes her eyes, shakes her head, and sighs in disbelief.	"Да." После долгой паузы она добавляет: «И нет. Я хочу знать, почему она не повысила самого квалифицированного человека в своей команде. Я хочу знать, трачу ли я время зря. Но если я спрошу, боюсь, меня никогда не повысят. Я могу подождать. Я подожду. Тогда я думаю, это ерунда! Я много работал и доказал свою ценность. Тем не менее, повышение получают белые мужчины в команде. Чтобы еще больше оскорбить то, что ее не заметили, она попросила меня ввести в курс дела белого мужчину, получившего повышение. Я так чертовски зол. Я не знаю, на кого я злюсь больше: на нее или на себя». Ангел закрывает глаза, качает головой и недоверчиво вздыхает.	“Yes.” After a long pause she adds, “And no. I want to know why she didn’t promote the most qualified person on her team. I want to know if I’m wasting my time. But if I ask, I’m afraid I’ll never get promoted. I can wait. I will wait. Then I think, this is bullshit! I have worked hard and proven my value. Yet it is the white men on the team who get promoted. To add insult to being overlooked, she asked me to bring the white man who got promoted up to speed. I am so damn angry. I don’t know who I’m most angry with, her or myself.” Angel closes her eyes, shakes her head, and sighs in disbelief.
“I hear how hard you’re working and not being recognized for your contribution. I get a sense that you’re most angry about tolerating your boss’s microaggressions and still not being promoted.”	“I hear how hard you’re working and not being recognized for your contribution. I get a sense that you’re most angry about tolerating your boss’s microaggressions and still not being promoted.”	«Я слышал, как усердно вы работаете, а ваш вклад не получают признания. У меня такое ощущение, что больше всего вас злит то, что вы терпите микроагрессию своего начальника и при этом не получаете повышения по службе».	“I hear how hard you’re working and not being recognized for your contribution. I get a sense that you’re most angry about tolerating your boss’s microaggressions and still not being promoted.”
“Thank you for saying that, because sometimes I feel like I’m not seeing or experiencing what I am. When my boss comments that I’m different from other Black people she’s managed—when she displays genuine surprise that I consistently arrive to work on time, complete projects on or ahead of schedule, and don’t complain about my workload—I think it’s going to pay off. I refuse to live down to her low expectations of me as a Black professional. The fact that she has such low expectations of me and other Black people pisses me off, but if I express my anger, I could lose my job. I even feel I’ll lose my job if I ask why I didn’t get promoted. I feel like I have no options but to keep doing what I’ve been doing: work hard and continue to take on the special projects, because if I keep demonstrating my worth, she’ll take note.”	“Thank you for saying that, because sometimes I feel like I’m not seeing or experiencing what I am. When my boss comments that I’m different from other Black people she’s managed—when she displays genuine surprise that I consistently arrive to work on time, complete projects on or ahead of schedule, and don’t complain about my workload—I think it’s going to pay off. I refuse to live down to her low expectations of me as a Black professional. The fact that she has such low expectations of me and other Black people pisses me off, but if I express my anger, I could lose my job. I even feel I’ll lose my job if I ask why I didn’t get promoted. I feel like I have no options but to keep doing what I’ve been doing: work hard and continue to take on the special projects, because if I keep demonstrating my worth, she’ll take note.”	«Спасибо, что сказали это, потому что иногда мне кажется, что я не вижу и не испытываю того, кто я есть. Когда мой начальник отмечает, что я отличаюсь от других чернокожих людей, которыми она руководит, — когда она искренне удивляется тому, что я всегда прихожу на работу вовремя, завершаю проекты в срок или раньше срока и не жалуюсь на свою рабочую нагрузку — я думаю, что это окупится. Я отказываюсь оправдывать ее низкие ожидания от меня как от чернокожего профессионала. Тот факт, что она так мало ожидает от меня и других чернокожих, меня бесит, но если я выражу свой гнев, я могу потерять работу. Я даже чувствую, что потеряю работу, если спрошу, почему меня не повысили. Я чувствую, что у меня нет другого выбора, кроме как продолжать делать то, что я делал: усердно работать и продолжать заниматься специальными проектами, потому что, если я продолжу демонстрировать свою ценность, она примет это к сведению».	“Thank you for saying that, because sometimes I feel like I’m not seeing or experiencing what I am. When my boss comments that I’m different from other Black people she’s managed—when she displays genuine surprise that I consistently arrive to work on time, complete projects on or ahead of schedule, and don’t complain about my workload—I think it’s going to pay off. I refuse to live down to her low expectations of me as a Black professional. The fact that she has such low expectations of me and other Black people pisses me off, but if I express my anger, I could lose my job. I even feel I’ll lose my job if I ask why I didn’t get promoted. I feel like I have no options but to keep doing what I’ve been doing: work hard and continue to take on the special projects, because if I keep demonstrating my worth, she’ll take note.”
“I hear you going back and forth between trying to please the boss by being a model employee, taking on extra projects and roles, and not being appreciated or rewarded for your dedication, which makes you angry.”	“I hear you going back and forth between trying to please the boss by being a model employee, taking on extra projects and roles, and not being appreciated or rewarded for your dedication, which makes you angry.”	«Я слышу, как вы мечетесь между попытками угодить начальнику, будучи образцовым сотрудником, беря на себя дополнительные проекты и роли, и тем, что вас не ценят и не вознаграждают за вашу преданность делу, что вас злит».	“I hear you going back and forth between trying to please the boss by being a model employee, taking on extra projects and roles, and not being appreciated or rewarded for your dedication, which makes you angry.”
“Yes, that’s exactly it. I have my Go Along to Get Along part that wants to please everybody, and then I have the Bulldog who wants to fight for what’s right.”	“Yes, that’s exactly it. I have my Go Along to Get Along part that wants to please everybody, and then I have the Bulldog who wants to fight for what’s right.”	«Да, это именно так. У меня есть часть «Идти вместе, чтобы ладить», которая хочет угодить всем, а также есть Бульдог, который хочет бороться за то, что правильно».	“Yes, that’s exactly it. I have my Go Along to Get Along part that wants to please everybody, and then I have the Bulldog who wants to fight for what’s right.”
“How do you feel toward these parts?”	“How do you feel toward these parts?”	«Как вы относитесь к этим местам?»	“How do you feel toward these parts?”
“I don’t like either.”	“I don’t like either.”	— Мне тоже не нравится.	“I don’t like either.”
“Angel, can you ask the part that doesn’t like either to step back?”	“Angel, can you ask the part that doesn’t like either to step back?”	«Ангел, можешь ли ты попросить ту часть, которая не любит ни того, ни другого, отступить?»	“Angel, can you ask the part that doesn’t like either to step back?”
“Oh, sure.” She closes her eyes and speaks silently with that part.	“Oh, sure.” She closes her eyes and speaks silently with that part.	«О, конечно». Она закрывает глаза и молча говорит этой частью.	“Oh, sure.” She closes her eyes and speaks silently with that part.
“Now, how do you feel toward the Go Along to Get Along part and the Bulldog?”	“Now, how do you feel toward the Go Along to Get Along part and the Bulldog?”	«А как вы относитесь к части «Иди вместе, чтобы ладить» и к Бульдогу?»	“Now, how do you feel toward the Go Along to Get Along part and the Bulldog?”
“I want to understand them more. I’m curious about them both.”	“I want to understand them more. I’m curious about them both.”	«Я хочу понять их больше. Мне интересно узнать о них обоих».	“I want to understand them more. I’m curious about them both.”
“Okay, that’s good. Let the parts know you’re curious and see if they’re willing to get to know you and each other.”	“Okay, that’s good. Let the parts know you’re curious and see if they’re willing to get to know you and each other.”	«Хорошо, это хорошо. Дайте частям понять, что вам интересно, и посмотрите, захотят ли они узнать вас и друг друга».	“Okay, that’s good. Let the parts know you’re curious and see if they’re willing to get to know you and each other.”
When Angel felt curious about both parts, they agreed to listen to each other and share their fears and concerns with her. We discovered that Go Along to Get Along is Angel’s face to the world. This part assists her in succeeding in school, career, and relationships by insisting that she go along with what other people want and expect of her, even when she doesn’t want to, because this part believes being likeable and not rocking the boat is how Angel will get ahead. Go Along to Get Along helps Angel to feel valued and seen by others by pleasing them and being likable. She also hopes that by appeasing others, she can keep Bulldog under control. Go Along to Get Along fears two outcomes if she stops doing her job. First, that Bulldog will blow up Angel’s life and cause irrevocable damage. Second, that Angel will feel worthless and unlovable and this will result in her being alone.	When Angel felt curious about both parts, they agreed to listen to each other and share their fears and concerns with her. We discovered that Go Along to Get Along is Angel’s face to the world. This part assists her in succeeding in school, career, and relationships by insisting that she go along with what other people want and expect of her, even when she doesn’t want to, because this part believes being likeable and not rocking the boat is how Angel will get ahead. Go Along to Get Along helps Angel to feel valued and seen by others by pleasing them and being likable. She also hopes that by appeasing others, she can keep Bulldog under control. Go Along to Get Along fears two outcomes if she stops doing her job. First, that Bulldog will blow up Angel’s life and cause irrevocable damage. Second, that Angel will feel worthless and unlovable and this will result in her being alone.	Когда Ангел почувствовала интерес к обеим сторонам, они согласились выслушать друг друга и поделиться с ней своими страхами и опасениями. Мы обнаружили, что «Иди вместе, чтобы ладить» — это лицо Ангела миру. Эта часть помогает ей добиться успеха в школе, карьере и отношениях, настаивая на том, чтобы она соглашалась с тем, чего хотят и ожидают от нее другие люди, даже когда она этого не хочет, потому что эта часть считает, что нужно быть симпатичным и не раскачивать лодку. как Ангел будет продвигаться вперед. «Иди вместе, чтобы ладить» помогает Ангелу чувствовать, что его ценят и видят другие, доставляя им удовольствие и вызывая симпатию. Она также надеется, что, умиротворяя других, она сможет держать Бульдога под контролем. «Иди вместе, чтобы ладить» опасается двух последствий, если она перестанет выполнять свою работу. Во-первых, этот Бульдог разрушит жизнь Ангела и нанесет непоправимый ущерб. Во-вторых, этот Ангел почувствует себя никчемным и непривлекательным, и это приведет к тому, что она останется одна.	When Angel felt curious about both parts, they agreed to listen to each other and share their fears and concerns with her. We discovered that Go Along to Get Along is Angel’s face to the world. This part assists her in succeeding in school, career, and relationships by insisting that she go along with what other people want and expect of her, even when she doesn’t want to, because this part believes being likeable and not rocking the boat is how Angel will get ahead. Go Along to Get Along helps Angel to feel valued and seen by others by pleasing them and being likable. She also hopes that by appeasing others, she can keep Bulldog under control. Go Along to Get Along fears two outcomes if she stops doing her job. First, that Bulldog will blow up Angel’s life and cause irrevocable damage. Second, that Angel will feel worthless and unlovable and this will result in her being alone.
In spending time getting to know Bulldog, we found there are two situations likely to activate this part’s rage. This part is angered when it believes Angel is being victimized or allowing others to take advantage of her. Bulldog holds that Angel is responsible at least partly for what it views as mistreatment because she won’t stand up for herself. It becomes enraged when Angel feels the emotional pain of worthlessness. In this particular situation, Bulldog was enraged and ready to confront Angel’s boss for devaluing her and causing feelings of unworthiness to surface.	In spending time getting to know Bulldog, we found there are two situations likely to activate this part’s rage. This part is angered when it believes Angel is being victimized or allowing others to take advantage of her. Bulldog holds that Angel is responsible at least partly for what it views as mistreatment because she won’t stand up for herself. It becomes enraged when Angel feels the emotional pain of worthlessness. In this particular situation, Bulldog was enraged and ready to confront Angel’s boss for devaluing her and causing feelings of unworthiness to surface.	Потратив время на знакомство с Бульдогом, мы обнаружили, что есть две ситуации, которые могут активировать ярость этой части. Эта часть возмущается, когда считает, что Ангел становится жертвой или позволяет другим воспользоваться ею. Бульдог считает, что Энджел несет ответственность, по крайней мере частично, за то, что она считает жестоким обращением, потому что она не может постоять за себя. Он приходит в ярость, когда Ангел чувствует эмоциональную боль своей никчемности. В этой конкретной ситуации Бульдог был в ярости и готов противостоять боссу Ангела за то, что он обесценил ее и вызвал на поверхность чувство своей никчемности.	In spending time getting to know Bulldog, we found there are two situations likely to activate this part’s rage. This part is angered when it believes Angel is being victimized or allowing others to take advantage of her. Bulldog holds that Angel is responsible at least partly for what it views as mistreatment because she won’t stand up for herself. It becomes enraged when Angel feels the emotional pain of worthlessness. In this particular situation, Bulldog was enraged and ready to confront Angel’s boss for devaluing her and causing feelings of unworthiness to surface.
In this exchange, Angel gained valuable information that she didn’t have before getting to know these parts. Her biggest takeaway was that neither part wanted her to feel worthless. They were both protecting the same exile. Go Along to Get Along protected Angel from feeling worthless by meeting others’ needs and requests in order to prove her value. If others see her as invaluable, she will not feel worthless, this part reasons. Bulldog’s strategy was to get angry, challenge, and criticize when Angel experienced worthlessness. Both Go Along to Get Along and Bulldog are protectors in Angel’s system. Go Along to Get Along is a manager who is working to keep Angel from ever feeling the worthlessness of the exile, and Bulldog is a firefighter who springs into action when Angel feels devalued and worthless. When these two parts gained awareness of how similar their roles are, they relaxed and granted access to the exile they both protected.	In this exchange, Angel gained valuable information that she didn’t have before getting to know these parts. Her biggest takeaway was that neither part wanted her to feel worthless. They were both protecting the same exile. Go Along to Get Along protected Angel from feeling worthless by meeting others’ needs and requests in order to prove her value. If others see her as invaluable, she will not feel worthless, this part reasons. Bulldog’s strategy was to get angry, challenge, and criticize when Angel experienced worthlessness. Both Go Along to Get Along and Bulldog are protectors in Angel’s system. Go Along to Get Along is a manager who is working to keep Angel from ever feeling the worthlessness of the exile, and Bulldog is a firefighter who springs into action when Angel feels devalued and worthless. When these two parts gained awareness of how similar their roles are, they relaxed and granted access to the exile they both protected.	В ходе этого разговора Ангел получила ценную информацию, которой у нее не было до знакомства с этими местами. Ее самым большим выводом было то, что ни одна из сторон не хотела, чтобы она чувствовала себя никчемной. Они оба защищали одного и того же изгнанника. Программа «Иди вместе, чтобы ладить» защитила Ангел от чувства никчемности, удовлетворяя нужды и запросы других, чтобы доказать свою ценность. Если другие видят в ней бесценную ценность, она не будет чувствовать себя никчемной, рассуждает эта часть. Стратегия Бульдога заключалась в том, чтобы злиться, бросать вызов и критиковать, когда Ангел чувствовал свою никчемность. И «Иди, чтобы ладить», и Бульдог — защитники в системе Ангела. «Иди вместе, чтобы ладить» — менеджер, который работает над тем, чтобы Ангел никогда не чувствовал никчемности изгнанника, а Бульдог — пожарный, который бросается в бой, когда Ангел чувствует себя обесцененным и бесполезным. Когда эти две части осознали, насколько схожи их роли, они расслабились и предоставили доступ к изгнаннику, которого оба защищали.	In this exchange, Angel gained valuable information that she didn’t have before getting to know these parts. Her biggest takeaway was that neither part wanted her to feel worthless. They were both protecting the same exile. Go Along to Get Along protected Angel from feeling worthless by meeting others’ needs and requests in order to prove her value. If others see her as invaluable, she will not feel worthless, this part reasons. Bulldog’s strategy was to get angry, challenge, and criticize when Angel experienced worthlessness. Both Go Along to Get Along and Bulldog are protectors in Angel’s system. Go Along to Get Along is a manager who is working to keep Angel from ever feeling the worthlessness of the exile, and Bulldog is a firefighter who springs into action when Angel feels devalued and worthless. When these two parts gained awareness of how similar their roles are, they relaxed and granted access to the exile they both protected.
Parts will give access to the vulnerable exile they protect when they feel heard. In the case of a polarization, the part needs to be heard and understood not only by the Self but also by the parts it’s polarized with. If parts do not allow access to the exile, it means you need to take more time to get to know these parts. It is important to discover what they are afraid would happen if they let you connect with the one they protect. Again, you need to hear them out, express compassion and curiosity for their concerns. Sometimes, it is too difficult to access an exile on your own, and it may require professional help. (See “Still Listening Resources” at the end of this book to locate a therapist or practitioner if you need to.)	Parts will give access to the vulnerable exile they protect when they feel heard. In the case of a polarization, the part needs to be heard and understood not only by the Self but also by the parts it’s polarized with. If parts do not allow access to the exile, it means you need to take more time to get to know these parts. It is important to discover what they are afraid would happen if they let you connect with the one they protect. Again, you need to hear them out, express compassion and curiosity for their concerns. Sometimes, it is too difficult to access an exile on your own, and it may require professional help. (See “Still Listening Resources” at the end of this book to locate a therapist or practitioner if you need to.)	Части откроют доступ к уязвимому изгнаннику, которого они защищают, когда почувствуют, что их услышали. В случае поляризации часть должна быть услышана и понята не только Самостью, но и частями, с которыми она поляризована. Если части не открывают доступ к изгнанию, значит, вам нужно потратить больше времени на знакомство с этими частями. Важно выяснить, чего они боятся, если они позволят вам связаться с тем, кого они защищают. Опять же, вам нужно выслушать их, выразить сострадание и интерес к их проблемам. Иногда самостоятельно получить доступ к изгнанию слишком сложно, и может потребоваться профессиональная помощь. (См. «Ресурсы для того, чтобы все еще слушать» в конце этой книги, чтобы найти терапевта или практикующего врача, если вам нужно.)	Parts will give access to the vulnerable exile they protect when they feel heard. In the case of a polarization, the part needs to be heard and understood not only by the Self but also by the parts it’s polarized with. If parts do not allow access to the exile, it means you need to take more time to get to know these parts. It is important to discover what they are afraid would happen if they let you connect with the one they protect. Again, you need to hear them out, express compassion and curiosity for their concerns. Sometimes, it is too difficult to access an exile on your own, and it may require professional help. (See “Still Listening Resources” at the end of this book to locate a therapist or practitioner if you need to.)
Meditation: Polarization Picnic	Meditation: Polarization Picnic	Медитация: пикник поляризации	Meditation: Polarization Picnic
The Polarization Picnic meditation is the sixth given to me by my ancestors. At the time I received this, I had been going back and forth about whether it was time to significantly reduce my private practice caseload. My burgeoning IFS consultation business and my pursuit of becoming an IFS trainer were requiring significantly more attention and time. One day I had certainty about cutting back my practice, and the very next day, I’d convince myself not to. During this dilemma, my generous and wise ancestors gifted me with the Polarization Picnic meditation. By listening to each side of my polarization, I gained clarity and ultimately was able to make a Self-led decision about my practice.	The Polarization Picnic meditation is the sixth given to me by my ancestors. At the time I received this, I had been going back and forth about whether it was time to significantly reduce my private practice caseload. My burgeoning IFS consultation business and my pursuit of becoming an IFS trainer were requiring significantly more attention and time. One day I had certainty about cutting back my practice, and the very next day, I’d convince myself not to. During this dilemma, my generous and wise ancestors gifted me with the Polarization Picnic meditation. By listening to each side of my polarization, I gained clarity and ultimately was able to make a Self-led decision about my practice.	Медитация «Поляризационный пикник» — шестая медитация, данная мне моими предками. В то время, когда я получил это письмо, я размышлял о том, не пора ли значительно сократить нагрузку на мою частную практику. Мой растущий консультационный бизнес по IFS и мое стремление стать тренером IFS требовали значительно больше внимания и времени. Однажды я был уверен, что сокращу свою практику, а уже на следующий день убедил себя не делать этого. Во время этой дилеммы мои щедрые и мудрые предки подарили мне медитацию «Поляризационный пикник». Прислушиваясь к каждой стороне своей поляризации, я обрел ясность и, в конечном итоге, смог принять самостоятельное решение относительно своей практики.	The Polarization Picnic meditation is the sixth given to me by my ancestors. At the time I received this, I had been going back and forth about whether it was time to significantly reduce my private practice caseload. My burgeoning IFS consultation business and my pursuit of becoming an IFS trainer were requiring significantly more attention and time. One day I had certainty about cutting back my practice, and the very next day, I’d convince myself not to. During this dilemma, my generous and wise ancestors gifted me with the Polarization Picnic meditation. By listening to each side of my polarization, I gained clarity and ultimately was able to make a Self-led decision about my practice.
This meditation invites you to get to know the story of two of your polarized parts, develop a relationship with them, and discover the vulnerable part they protect.	This meditation invites you to get to know the story of two of your polarized parts, develop a relationship with them, and discover the vulnerable part they protect.	Эта медитация предлагает вам узнать историю двух ваших поляризованных частей, развить с ними отношения и обнаружить уязвимую часть, которую они защищают.	This meditation invites you to get to know the story of two of your polarized parts, develop a relationship with them, and discover the vulnerable part they protect.
Find a comfortable seat.	Find a comfortable seat.	Найдите удобное сиденье.	Find a comfortable seat.
Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Закройте глаза или смягчите взгляд.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.
Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.	Перенесите свое осознание на свое дыхание и просто дышите.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.
Breathe in for four counts and breathe out for four counts.	Breathe in for four counts and breathe out for four counts.	Вдохните на четыре счета и выдохните на четыре счета.	Breathe in for four counts and breathe out for four counts.
Do that a few times, increasing your relaxation.	Do that a few times, increasing your relaxation.	Сделайте это несколько раз, увеличивая расслабление.	Do that a few times, increasing your relaxation.
Visualize you’re in a park, sitting on a picnic blanket.	Visualize you’re in a park, sitting on a picnic blanket.	Представьте, что вы находитесь в парке и сидите на одеяле для пикника.	Visualize you’re in a park, sitting on a picnic blanket.
You have a picnic basket with a spread of your favorite foods, enough to feed you and several others.	You have a picnic basket with a spread of your favorite foods, enough to feed you and several others.	У вас есть корзина для пикника с набором ваших любимых продуктов, которой хватит, чтобы накормить вас и еще нескольких человек.	You have a picnic basket with a spread of your favorite foods, enough to feed you and several others.
While removing items from the basket, you hear arguing.	While removing items from the basket, you hear arguing.	Вынимая товары из корзины, вы слышите спор.	While removing items from the basket, you hear arguing.
You look in the direction of the disagreeable noise and see two parts of yourself.	You look in the direction of the disagreeable noise and see two parts of yourself.	Вы смотрите в сторону неприятного шума и видите две части себя.	You look in the direction of the disagreeable noise and see two parts of yourself.
They are speaking in raised tones with neither listening.	They are speaking in raised tones with neither listening.	Они говорят на повышенных тонах, но их никто не слушает.	They are speaking in raised tones with neither listening.
You do what you can to get their attention.	You do what you can to get their attention.	Вы делаете все возможное, чтобы привлечь их внимание.	You do what you can to get their attention.
When they notice, you invite them to join you on the blanket.	When they notice, you invite them to join you on the blanket.	Когда они это заметят, вы приглашаете их присоединиться к вам на одеяле.	When they notice, you invite them to join you on the blanket.
They sit down and start explaining their side of the argument.	They sit down and start explaining their side of the argument.	Они садятся и начинают объяснять свою точку зрения.	They sit down and start explaining their side of the argument.
Compassionately, you tell them you want to help.	Compassionately, you tell them you want to help.	Вы из сострадания говорите им, что хотите помочь.	Compassionately, you tell them you want to help.
Again, they respond by speaking over one another.	Again, they respond by speaking over one another.	И снова они отвечают, переговариваясь друг с другом.	Again, they respond by speaking over one another.
Share that you’re curious to get to know each of them one at a time.	Share that you’re curious to get to know each of them one at a time.	Поделитесь, что вам интересно познакомиться с каждым из них по отдельности.	Share that you’re curious to get to know each of them one at a time.
Reassure them that each will get a chance, and you will not allow one to take over.	Reassure them that each will get a chance, and you will not allow one to take over.	Убедите их, что у каждого будет шанс, и вы не позволите никому взять верх.	Reassure them that each will get a chance, and you will not allow one to take over.
Next, you ask them if they are willing to listen to each other.	Next, you ask them if they are willing to listen to each other.	Затем вы спрашиваете их, готовы ли они выслушать друг друга.	Next, you ask them if they are willing to listen to each other.
If they are not, listen and address their concerns.	If they are not, listen and address their concerns.	Если это не так, выслушайте и решите их проблемы.	If they are not, listen and address their concerns.
If they are, ask the first part why it is doing what it’s doing.	If they are, ask the first part why it is doing what it’s doing.	Если да, спросите первую часть, почему она делает то, что делает.	If they are, ask the first part why it is doing what it’s doing.
Then ask how it is trying to help.	Then ask how it is trying to help.	Затем спросите, как он пытается помочь.	Then ask how it is trying to help.
Once you have a sense of how this part is trying to help, turn to the second part and ask why it is doing what it’s doing.	Once you have a sense of how this part is trying to help, turn to the second part and ask why it is doing what it’s doing.	Как только вы поймете, как эта часть пытается помочь, обратитесь ко второй части и спросите, почему она делает то, что делает.	Once you have a sense of how this part is trying to help, turn to the second part and ask why it is doing what it’s doing.
Now ask how it is trying to help.	Now ask how it is trying to help.	Теперь спросите, как он пытается помочь.	Now ask how it is trying to help.
Notice how both parts are trying to help you and acknowledge their positive intent.	Notice how both parts are trying to help you and acknowledge their positive intent.	Обратите внимание, как обе части пытаются вам помочь, и признайте их позитивные намерения.	Notice how both parts are trying to help you and acknowledge their positive intent.
Ask them what their behavior costs them.	Ask them what their behavior costs them.	Спросите их, чего им стоит их поведение.	Ask them what their behavior costs them.
Allow each an opportunity to speak in turn.	Allow each an opportunity to speak in turn.	Дайте каждому возможность высказаться по очереди.	Allow each an opportunity to speak in turn.
When that feels complete, ask each of them what they are afraid would happen if they didn’t do this.	When that feels complete, ask each of them what they are afraid would happen if they didn’t do this.	Когда вы почувствуете, что все готово, спросите каждого из них, чего, по их мнению, произойдет, если они этого не сделают.	When that feels complete, ask each of them what they are afraid would happen if they didn’t do this.
Lastly, ask them to show you the vulnerable one they are protecting.	Lastly, ask them to show you the vulnerable one they are protecting.	Наконец, попросите их показать вам уязвимого человека, которого они защищают.	Lastly, ask them to show you the vulnerable one they are protecting.
If they do, let them know that you can help that part.	If they do, let them know that you can help that part.	Если да, дайте им знать, что вы можете помочь в этой части.	If they do, let them know that you can help that part.
If they do not, that’s okay. You may need to spend more time getting to know them.	If they do not, that’s okay. You may need to spend more time getting to know them.	Если они этого не делают, это нормально. Возможно, вам придется потратить больше времени на их знакомство.	If they do not, that’s okay. You may need to spend more time getting to know them.
Invite them to share your picnic meal, and over the meal, explore with the parts anything else they want to share with you.	Invite them to share your picnic meal, and over the meal, explore with the parts anything else they want to share with you.	Пригласите их разделить с вами еду для пикника, а во время еды вместе с частями изучите все, чем они хотят с вами поделиться.	Invite them to share your picnic meal, and over the meal, explore with the parts anything else they want to share with you.
Let them know you would like to continue connecting with them, and set intentions to do so.	Let them know you would like to continue connecting with them, and set intentions to do so.	Сообщите им, что вы хотели бы продолжить общение с ними, и поставьте перед собой такое намерение.	Let them know you would like to continue connecting with them, and set intentions to do so.
If it feels right, show them some appreciation for what they shared with you and each other.	If it feels right, show them some appreciation for what they shared with you and each other.	Если это кажется правильным, покажите им некоторую признательность за то, чем они поделились с вами и друг с другом.	If it feels right, show them some appreciation for what they shared with you and each other.
Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	Сосредоточьте свое внимание на своем дыхании и просто дышите, возвращаясь в этот момент и пространство.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.
Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Медленно откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: Polarization Picnic Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Polarization Picnic Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Вопросы для журнала «Поляризация пикника»	Exercise 2: Polarization Picnic Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Polarization Picnic meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Polarization Picnic meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили медитацию «Поляризационный пикник» и написали быстрый «Захват журнала», потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, отвечая на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Polarization Picnic meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
Who are your polarized parts?	Who are your polarized parts?	Кто ваши поляризованные части?	Who are your polarized parts?
Describe how your parts are polarized.	Describe how your parts are polarized.	Опишите, как поляризованы ваши части.	Describe how your parts are polarized.
Were your parts able to listen to each other? Why? Why not?	Were your parts able to listen to each other? Why? Why not?	Смогли ли ваши части услышать друг друга? Почему? Почему нет?	Were your parts able to listen to each other? Why? Why not?
What is the position of each part?	What is the position of each part?	Каково положение каждой части?	What is the position of each part?
Why is each part doing what they are doing?	Why is each part doing what they are doing?	Почему каждая часть делает то, что делает?	Why is each part doing what they are doing?
How is each part trying to help you?	How is each part trying to help you?	Как каждая часть пытается вам помочь?	How is each part trying to help you?
Who is the vulnerable one(s) your parts protect?	Who is the vulnerable one(s) your parts protect?	Кого уязвимы ваши части?	Who is the vulnerable one(s) your parts protect?
What are the situations and/or people in your life that activate these parts?	What are the situations and/or people in your life that activate these parts?	Какие ситуации и/или люди в вашей жизни активизируют эти части?	What are the situations and/or people in your life that activate these parts?
What more did you learn from these parts?	What more did you learn from these parts?	Что еще вы узнали из этих мест?	What more did you learn from these parts?
Exercise 3: Drawing the Polarized System	Exercise 3: Drawing the Polarized System	Упражнение 3. Рисование поляризованной системы	Exercise 3: Drawing the Polarized System
Before starting this exercise, get some drawing supplies: paper, markers, colored pencils, paints, whatever works for you. Then move through the steps of this exercise.	Before starting this exercise, get some drawing supplies: paper, markers, colored pencils, paints, whatever works for you. Then move through the steps of this exercise.	Прежде чем приступить к этому упражнению, приобретите принадлежности для рисования: бумагу, маркеры, цветные карандаши, краски — все, что вам подходит. Затем выполните шаги этого упражнения.	Before starting this exercise, get some drawing supplies: paper, markers, colored pencils, paints, whatever works for you. Then move through the steps of this exercise.
Step 1: Go inside and connect with the first part from the Polarization Picnic meditation. It may express itself with words, images, sensations, emotions, or a felt sense.	Step 1: Go inside and connect with the first part from the Polarization Picnic meditation. It may express itself with words, images, sensations, emotions, or a felt sense.	Шаг 1: Зайдите внутрь и соединитесь с первой частью медитации «Пикник поляризации». Он может выражать себя словами, образами, ощущениями, эмоциями или чувствами.	Step 1: Go inside and connect with the first part from the Polarization Picnic meditation. It may express itself with words, images, sensations, emotions, or a felt sense.
Step 2: Once you have a sense of this part, ask it how it wants to be represented on the page, then draw it.	Step 2: Once you have a sense of this part, ask it how it wants to be represented on the page, then draw it.	Шаг 2: Как только вы поймете эту часть, спросите ее, как она хочет быть представлена ​​на странице, а затем нарисуйте ее.	Step 2: Once you have a sense of this part, ask it how it wants to be represented on the page, then draw it.
Step 3: Go inside and connect with the second part from the Polarization Picnic meditation.	Step 3: Go inside and connect with the second part from the Polarization Picnic meditation.	Шаг 3: Зайдите внутрь и соединитесь со второй частью медитации «Пикник поляризации».	Step 3: Go inside and connect with the second part from the Polarization Picnic meditation.
Step 4: Once you have a sense of this part, ask it how it wants to be represented on the page and where it wants to be on the page in relationship to the first part, then draw it.	Step 4: Once you have a sense of this part, ask it how it wants to be represented on the page and where it wants to be on the page in relationship to the first part, then draw it.	Шаг 4: Как только вы поймете эту часть, спросите ее, как она хочет быть представлена ​​на странице и где она хочет находиться на странице по отношению к первой части, а затем нарисуйте ее.	Step 4: Once you have a sense of this part, ask it how it wants to be represented on the page and where it wants to be on the page in relationship to the first part, then draw it.
Step 5: Look at the first part you drew. How do you feel toward this part? If it is a quality of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), draw a representation of the quality of Self near the part. If it’s not a quality of Self, connect with this new part and draw it on the page where it wants to be placed.	Step 5: Look at the first part you drew. How do you feel toward this part? If it is a quality of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), draw a representation of the quality of Self near the part. If it’s not a quality of Self, connect with this new part and draw it on the page where it wants to be placed.	Шаг 5: Посмотрите на первую часть, которую вы нарисовали. Как вы относитесь к этой части? Если это качество Личности (сострадание, любопытство, спокойствие, уверенность, творчество, связность, смелость или ясность), нарисуйте изображение качества Личности рядом с этой деталью. Если это не качество Самости, соединитесь с этой новой частью и нарисуйте ее на странице, где она хочет быть размещена.	Step 5: Look at the first part you drew. How do you feel toward this part? If it is a quality of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), draw a representation of the quality of Self near the part. If it’s not a quality of Self, connect with this new part and draw it on the page where it wants to be placed.
Step 6: Look at the second part you drew. How do you feel toward this part? If it is a quality of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), draw a representation of the quality of Self near the part. If it’s not a quality of Self, connect with this new part and draw it on the page where it wants to be placed.	Step 6: Look at the second part you drew. How do you feel toward this part? If it is a quality of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), draw a representation of the quality of Self near the part. If it’s not a quality of Self, connect with this new part and draw it on the page where it wants to be placed.	Шаг 6: Посмотрите на вторую часть, которую вы нарисовали. Как вы относитесь к этой части? Если это качество Личности (сострадание, любопытство, спокойствие, уверенность, творчество, связность, смелость или ясность), нарисуйте изображение качества Личности рядом с этой деталью. Если это не качество Самости, соединитесь с этой новой частью и нарисуйте ее на странице, где она хочет быть размещена.	Step 6: Look at the second part you drew. How do you feel toward this part? If it is a quality of Self (compassion, curiosity, calm, confidence, creativity, connectedness, courage, or clarity), draw a representation of the quality of Self near the part. If it’s not a quality of Self, connect with this new part and draw it on the page where it wants to be placed.
Step 7: Take some time to look at your parts on the page. Take as long as you need. As you look at your polarized system, what do you notice?	Step 7: Take some time to look at your parts on the page. Take as long as you need. As you look at your polarized system, what do you notice?	Шаг 7: Найдите время, чтобы просмотреть свои части на странице. Возьмите столько времени, сколько вам нужно. Что вы замечаете, глядя на свою поляризованную систему?	Step 7: Take some time to look at your parts on the page. Take as long as you need. As you look at your polarized system, what do you notice?
Step 8: You can continue to connect with your polarized system using your drawing to get to know more about each of these parts.	Step 8: You can continue to connect with your polarized system using your drawing to get to know more about each of these parts.	Шаг 8: Вы можете продолжать подключаться к своей поляризованной системе, используя рисунок, чтобы узнать больше о каждой из этих частей.	Step 8: You can continue to connect with your polarized system using your drawing to get to know more about each of these parts.
CHAPTER 8	CHAPTER 8	ГЛАВА 8	CHAPTER 8
Waterfall	Waterfall	Водопад	Waterfall
Working with Trauma Expressed in the Body	Working with Trauma Expressed in the Body	Работа с травмой, выраженной в теле	Working with Trauma Expressed in the Body
I was a passenger in a terrible car accident at 19 years old. My boyfriend at the time was driving. He had a green arrow for a left turn when a car came through the intersection and T-boned us on my side of the car. My injuries made it necessary for me to leave my job and college studies to recover. The lasting effects of the accident were severe lower back pain that worsened in times of stress, overwork, and emotional challenge. I sought pain relief from a multitude of medications, physical therapies, yoga, and homeopathic remedies, but nothing provided sustained improvement. I lived with the limitations of excruciating back pain for 26 years before finding true relief.	I was a passenger in a terrible car accident at 19 years old. My boyfriend at the time was driving. He had a green arrow for a left turn when a car came through the intersection and T-boned us on my side of the car. My injuries made it necessary for me to leave my job and college studies to recover. The lasting effects of the accident were severe lower back pain that worsened in times of stress, overwork, and emotional challenge. I sought pain relief from a multitude of medications, physical therapies, yoga, and homeopathic remedies, but nothing provided sustained improvement. I lived with the limitations of excruciating back pain for 26 years before finding true relief.	В 19 лет я был пассажиром ужасной автокатастрофы. Мой парень в это время был за рулем. У него была зеленая стрелка для поворота налево, когда машина проезжала перекресток и врезалась в нас с моей стороны машины. Из-за травм мне пришлось оставить работу и учебу в колледже, чтобы восстановиться. Последствиями аварии стали сильные боли в пояснице, которые усиливались во время стресса, переутомления и эмоциональных испытаний. Я искал облегчения боли с помощью множества лекарств, физиотерапии, йоги и гомеопатических средств, но ничто не давало устойчивого улучшения. Я жил с мучительной болью в спине в течение 26 лет, прежде чем нашел истинное облегчение.	I was a passenger in a terrible car accident at 19 years old. My boyfriend at the time was driving. He had a green arrow for a left turn when a car came through the intersection and T-boned us on my side of the car. My injuries made it necessary for me to leave my job and college studies to recover. The lasting effects of the accident were severe lower back pain that worsened in times of stress, overwork, and emotional challenge. I sought pain relief from a multitude of medications, physical therapies, yoga, and homeopathic remedies, but nothing provided sustained improvement. I lived with the limitations of excruciating back pain for 26 years before finding true relief.
Two books, The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain, by Dr. John Sarno,1 and The MindBody Workbook: A Thirty Day Program of Insight and Awareness for People with Back Pain and Other Disorders, by Dr. David Schechter,2 changed the course of how my parts used my body and back pain to communicate with me. Although neither book expressly mentions parts, they both speak of “repressed emotions” such as anger, fear, and unresolved grief and “aspects of personality” such as people pleasing, perfectionism, criticism, controlling, and over-responsibility, all of which are ways parts express in their extreme states.	Two books, The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain, by Dr. John Sarno,1 and The MindBody Workbook: A Thirty Day Program of Insight and Awareness for People with Back Pain and Other Disorders, by Dr. David Schechter,2 changed the course of how my parts used my body and back pain to communicate with me. Although neither book expressly mentions parts, they both speak of “repressed emotions” such as anger, fear, and unresolved grief and “aspects of personality” such as people pleasing, perfectionism, criticism, controlling, and over-responsibility, all of which are ways parts express in their extreme states.	Две книги: «Рецепт для тела и тела: исцеление тела, исцеление боли» доктора Джона Сарно1 и «Рабочая тетрадь MindBody: тридцатидневная программа понимания и осознания для людей с болями в спине и другими заболеваниями» доктора Дэвида Шехтера. 2 изменил способ того, как мои части использовали мое тело и боль в спине для общения со мной. Хотя ни в одной книге конкретно не упоминаются отдельные части, в обеих говорится о «подавленных эмоциях», таких как гнев, страх и неразрешимое горе, а также о «аспектах личности», таких как угождение людям, перфекционизм, критика, контроль и чрезмерная ответственность. способы выражения частей в своих крайних состояниях.	Two books, The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain, by Dr. John Sarno,1 and The MindBody Workbook: A Thirty Day Program of Insight and Awareness for People with Back Pain and Other Disorders, by Dr. David Schechter,2 changed the course of how my parts used my body and back pain to communicate with me. Although neither book expressly mentions parts, they both speak of “repressed emotions” such as anger, fear, and unresolved grief and “aspects of personality” such as people pleasing, perfectionism, criticism, controlling, and over-responsibility, all of which are ways parts express in their extreme states.
At the time I read these two books, my life was driven by each of these aspects of personality (parts) and the repressed emotions (parts) of rage, rejection, and shame. I would not allow myself to accept how inadequate I felt as a parent of a child who experienced an unbelievable amount of trauma in the foster care system prior to me adopting her. I believed my education and training as a social worker and my profession as a psychotherapist meant I should be able to help my child recover from their traumatic experiences, and simultaneously I carried the shame of my inability to do so.	At the time I read these two books, my life was driven by each of these aspects of personality (parts) and the repressed emotions (parts) of rage, rejection, and shame. I would not allow myself to accept how inadequate I felt as a parent of a child who experienced an unbelievable amount of trauma in the foster care system prior to me adopting her. I believed my education and training as a social worker and my profession as a psychotherapist meant I should be able to help my child recover from their traumatic experiences, and simultaneously I carried the shame of my inability to do so.	В то время, когда я читал эти две книги, моя жизнь определялась каждым из этих аспектов личности (частей) и подавленными эмоциями (частями) гнева, неприятия и стыда. Я не позволил себе смириться с тем, насколько неадекватным я себя чувствовал как родитель ребенка, который перенес невероятную травму в системе приемной семьи до того, как я ее усыновил. Я верил, что мое образование и подготовка социального работника, а также моя профессия психотерапевта означают, что я должен быть в состоянии помочь моему ребенку оправиться от травматического опыта, и одновременно я носил стыд за свою неспособность сделать это.	At the time I read these two books, my life was driven by each of these aspects of personality (parts) and the repressed emotions (parts) of rage, rejection, and shame. I would not allow myself to accept how inadequate I felt as a parent of a child who experienced an unbelievable amount of trauma in the foster care system prior to me adopting her. I believed my education and training as a social worker and my profession as a psychotherapist meant I should be able to help my child recover from their traumatic experiences, and simultaneously I carried the shame of my inability to do so.
My denial of reality, the self-rage at my shortcomings as a parent, the rejection I felt from my child, and the shame of not being the perfect mother of my imaginations expressed in my body by intensifying my back pain.	My denial of reality, the self-rage at my shortcomings as a parent, the rejection I felt from my child, and the shame of not being the perfect mother of my imaginations expressed in my body by intensifying my back pain.	Мое отрицание реальности, гнев на себя из-за своих недостатков как родителя, отвержение, которое я чувствовал со стороны своего ребенка, и стыд за то, что я не идеальная мать моего воображения, выразились в моем теле, усилив боль в спине.	My denial of reality, the self-rage at my shortcomings as a parent, the rejection I felt from my child, and the shame of not being the perfect mother of my imaginations expressed in my body by intensifying my back pain.
IFS CONCEPT 1: PROTECTORS AND THE BODY	IFS CONCEPT 1: PROTECTORS AND THE BODY	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: ЗАЩИТНИКИ И КОРПУС	IFS CONCEPT 1: PROTECTORS AND THE BODY
Parts are both impacted by the body and have impact on the body. They inhibit the body as a way of self-expression to shut us down or rev us up. Each of the three types of parts discussed in earlier chapters uses the body. In the book Internal Family Systems Therapy, 2nd Edition, Dr. Richard Schwartz states that parts can create symptoms, maintain, exacerbate, or prolong them.3 Parts express bodily sensations such as a tightening of the stomach, heat in the torso, or expansiveness in the heart. They may express pain such as a migraine, back pain, or pain in an area of the body that was injured in the past. Parts also assert themselves through illness, either causing illness or using an existing illness to express themselves.	Parts are both impacted by the body and have impact on the body. They inhibit the body as a way of self-expression to shut us down or rev us up. Each of the three types of parts discussed in earlier chapters uses the body. In the book Internal Family Systems Therapy, 2nd Edition, Dr. Richard Schwartz states that parts can create symptoms, maintain, exacerbate, or prolong them.3 Parts express bodily sensations such as a tightening of the stomach, heat in the torso, or expansiveness in the heart. They may express pain such as a migraine, back pain, or pain in an area of the body that was injured in the past. Parts also assert themselves through illness, either causing illness or using an existing illness to express themselves.	Части как подвергаются воздействию тела, так и оказывают воздействие на тело. Они подавляют тело как способ самовыражения, чтобы отключить или активизировать нас. Каждый из трех типов частей, обсуждавшихся в предыдущих главах, использует тело. В книге «Внутренняя семейная системная терапия, 2-е издание» д-р Ричард Шварц утверждает, что части могут создавать симптомы, поддерживать, усугублять или продлевать их.3 Части выражают телесные ощущения, такие как сжатие желудка, жар в туловище или расширение тела. в сердце. Они могут выражать такие боли, как мигрень, боль в спине или боль в той части тела, которая была повреждена в прошлом. Части также самоутверждаются посредством болезни, либо вызывая болезнь, либо используя существующую болезнь для выражения себя.	Parts are both impacted by the body and have impact on the body. They inhibit the body as a way of self-expression to shut us down or rev us up. Each of the three types of parts discussed in earlier chapters uses the body. In the book Internal Family Systems Therapy, 2nd Edition, Dr. Richard Schwartz states that parts can create symptoms, maintain, exacerbate, or prolong them.3 Parts express bodily sensations such as a tightening of the stomach, heat in the torso, or expansiveness in the heart. They may express pain such as a migraine, back pain, or pain in an area of the body that was injured in the past. Parts also assert themselves through illness, either causing illness or using an existing illness to express themselves.
Earlier we learned that protectors are either managers or firefighters. These two types of protectors use the body differently. The preemptive managers need to control vulnerability. They will employ the muscle to keep our attention away from vulnerable parts. A person may experience chronic muscle and/or joint pain to avoid facing feelings of shame. The more exiles in a person’s system or the more intense the person’s trauma, the more physical ailments managers may use. It is not uncommon for me to have clients who experience multiple manager-related complaints such as tension and migraine headaches, fibromyalgia, jaw pain, fatigue, and/or re-experiencing pain that had previously been controlled. While the person in pain is consumed with diagnoses and treatments, which can take years to prove effective, managers are doing their job of keeping the person’s exiles out of awareness.	Earlier we learned that protectors are either managers or firefighters. These two types of protectors use the body differently. The preemptive managers need to control vulnerability. They will employ the muscle to keep our attention away from vulnerable parts. A person may experience chronic muscle and/or joint pain to avoid facing feelings of shame. The more exiles in a person’s system or the more intense the person’s trauma, the more physical ailments managers may use. It is not uncommon for me to have clients who experience multiple manager-related complaints such as tension and migraine headaches, fibromyalgia, jaw pain, fatigue, and/or re-experiencing pain that had previously been controlled. While the person in pain is consumed with diagnoses and treatments, which can take years to prove effective, managers are doing their job of keeping the person’s exiles out of awareness.	Ранее мы узнали, что защитники — это либо менеджеры, либо пожарные. Эти два типа защитников по-разному используют тело. Упреждающим менеджерам необходимо контролировать уязвимость. Они задействуют мышцы, чтобы отвлечь наше внимание от уязвимых частей. Человек может испытывать хроническую боль в мышцах и/или суставах, чтобы избежать чувства стыда. Чем больше изгнанников в системе человека или чем интенсивнее его травма, тем больше физических недугов могут использовать менеджеры. У меня нередко есть клиенты, которые испытывают многочисленные жалобы, связанные с менеджером, такие как напряжение и мигрени, фибромиалгия, боль в челюсти, усталость и/или повторное возникновение боли, которую ранее контролировали. В то время как человек, страдающий от боли, поглощен диагнозами и лечением, эффективность которого может занять годы, менеджеры выполняют свою работу по тому, чтобы скрыть изгнанников этого человека.	Earlier we learned that protectors are either managers or firefighters. These two types of protectors use the body differently. The preemptive managers need to control vulnerability. They will employ the muscle to keep our attention away from vulnerable parts. A person may experience chronic muscle and/or joint pain to avoid facing feelings of shame. The more exiles in a person’s system or the more intense the person’s trauma, the more physical ailments managers may use. It is not uncommon for me to have clients who experience multiple manager-related complaints such as tension and migraine headaches, fibromyalgia, jaw pain, fatigue, and/or re-experiencing pain that had previously been controlled. While the person in pain is consumed with diagnoses and treatments, which can take years to prove effective, managers are doing their job of keeping the person’s exiles out of awareness.
Reactive firefighters are tasked with suppressing vulnerable feelings once they are experienced. Their behaviors activate fight, flight, freeze, or fawn responses. Their reactions are impulsive and immediate because the threat of vulnerability feels like imminent danger to our firefighters. They may cause heart palpitations to the point of pain, shortness of breath making it hard to breathe, and intense nausea. Additionally, Schwartz explains that “firefighters use physical arousal or desire (e.g., cravings for food, sex, alcohol, drugs, or sleep) to distract from emotions they view as a threat.”4 Firefighters will employ multiple strategies for as long as needed until the emotional pain is completely extinguished.	Reactive firefighters are tasked with suppressing vulnerable feelings once they are experienced. Their behaviors activate fight, flight, freeze, or fawn responses. Their reactions are impulsive and immediate because the threat of vulnerability feels like imminent danger to our firefighters. They may cause heart palpitations to the point of pain, shortness of breath making it hard to breathe, and intense nausea. Additionally, Schwartz explains that “firefighters use physical arousal or desire (e.g., cravings for food, sex, alcohol, drugs, or sleep) to distract from emotions they view as a threat.”4 Firefighters will employ multiple strategies for as long as needed until the emotional pain is completely extinguished.	Перед реактивными пожарными стоит задача подавлять уязвимые чувства, как только они возникают. Их поведение активирует реакции борьбы, бегства, замирания или подхалимства. Их реакция импульсивна и немедленна, потому что угроза уязвимости кажется непосредственной опасностью для наших пожарных. Они могут вызывать учащенное сердцебиение до боли, одышку, затрудняющую дыхание, и сильную тошноту. Кроме того, Шварц объясняет, что «пожарные используют физическое возбуждение или желание (например, тягу к еде, сексу, алкоголю, наркотикам или сну), чтобы отвлечься от эмоций, которые они считают угрозой». до тех пор, пока эмоциональная боль не угаснет полностью.	Reactive firefighters are tasked with suppressing vulnerable feelings once they are experienced. Their behaviors activate fight, flight, freeze, or fawn responses. Their reactions are impulsive and immediate because the threat of vulnerability feels like imminent danger to our firefighters. They may cause heart palpitations to the point of pain, shortness of breath making it hard to breathe, and intense nausea. Additionally, Schwartz explains that “firefighters use physical arousal or desire (e.g., cravings for food, sex, alcohol, drugs, or sleep) to distract from emotions they view as a threat.”4 Firefighters will employ multiple strategies for as long as needed until the emotional pain is completely extinguished.
IFS CONCEPT 2: EXILES AND THE BODY	IFS CONCEPT 2: EXILES AND THE BODY	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: ИЗГНАННЫЕ И ТЕЛО	IFS CONCEPT 2: EXILES AND THE BODY
Exiles use the body to signal their need for help. They have been silenced and hidden away by other parts, caregivers, life experiences, and trauma. They are desperate to receive redemption and tell their story. Because exiles were injured at a young age, some before they were verbal, the pain of their experiences is held in the body. In their quest for redemption and help, they need to be believed. They will use body sensations to get our attention. The ways in which they use the body is directly connected to the abuse, neglect, or terror they experienced. They may communicate through tears, freezing, trembling, smells, and/or the physical pain of their trauma. Exiles hold that if they are heard and believed, they will be redeemed and viewed as worthwhile and lovable.	Exiles use the body to signal their need for help. They have been silenced and hidden away by other parts, caregivers, life experiences, and trauma. They are desperate to receive redemption and tell their story. Because exiles were injured at a young age, some before they were verbal, the pain of their experiences is held in the body. In their quest for redemption and help, they need to be believed. They will use body sensations to get our attention. The ways in which they use the body is directly connected to the abuse, neglect, or terror they experienced. They may communicate through tears, freezing, trembling, smells, and/or the physical pain of their trauma. Exiles hold that if they are heard and believed, they will be redeemed and viewed as worthwhile and lovable.	Изгнанники используют тело, чтобы сигнализировать о своей потребности в помощи. Их заставили замолчать и спрятали другие части тела, лица, осуществляющие уход, жизненный опыт и травмы. Они отчаянно пытаются получить искупление и рассказать свою историю. Поскольку ссыльные получили ранения в молодом возрасте, а некоторые еще до того, как разговорились, боль от их переживаний сохраняется в теле. В их стремлении к искуплению и помощи им нужно верить. Они будут использовать телесные ощущения, чтобы привлечь наше внимание. То, как они используют свое тело, напрямую связано с насилием, пренебрежением или ужасом, которые они пережили. Они могут общаться через слезы, замерзание, дрожь, запахи и/или физическую боль от травмы. Изгнанники считают, что если их услышат и поверят, они будут искуплены и будут считаться достойными и достойными любви.	Exiles use the body to signal their need for help. They have been silenced and hidden away by other parts, caregivers, life experiences, and trauma. They are desperate to receive redemption and tell their story. Because exiles were injured at a young age, some before they were verbal, the pain of their experiences is held in the body. In their quest for redemption and help, they need to be believed. They will use body sensations to get our attention. The ways in which they use the body is directly connected to the abuse, neglect, or terror they experienced. They may communicate through tears, freezing, trembling, smells, and/or the physical pain of their trauma. Exiles hold that if they are heard and believed, they will be redeemed and viewed as worthwhile and lovable.
IFS CONCEPT 3: POLARIZED PARTS AND THE BODY	IFS CONCEPT 3: POLARIZED PARTS AND THE BODY	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 3: ПОЛЯРИЗОВАННЫЕ ЧАСТИ И ТЕЛО	IFS CONCEPT 3: POLARIZED PARTS AND THE BODY
As we saw in Chapter 7, we are polarized when two parts or groups of parts are in opposition with little access to Self. Each side of the polarization fears the other side taking over, which leads to a power struggle. The most common polarization is that between a manager and a firefighter. The manager’s role is to keep us from experiencing painful emotions and vulnerability, while firefighters want to take us out of those feelings when they occur. For example, a person struggling with the decision to stay in an unfulfilling relationship or leave has a polarization. Certain parts have reasons to stay, while opposing parts have reasons to end the relationship. Understandably, there are emotions connected with each side of this decision, and exiled feelings of not being good enough and fear of loneliness. Managers use the person’s body to express anxiety to keep them from feeling hurt, sadness, and unworthiness. While the person remains in the relationship, they may experience an upset stomach, tension headaches, and sustained nervous energy. These experiences are polarized with firefighters who are triggered when the managers’ attempts to control these undesirable emotions fail. To douse the unwanted feelings of not being good enough, firefighters use physical arousal of food or alcohol. Due to the polarization, each side will fight to control the person, creating a vicious cycle of physical bodily upset followed by the use of food or alcohol for emotional numbing.	As we saw in Chapter 7, we are polarized when two parts or groups of parts are in opposition with little access to Self. Each side of the polarization fears the other side taking over, which leads to a power struggle. The most common polarization is that between a manager and a firefighter. The manager’s role is to keep us from experiencing painful emotions and vulnerability, while firefighters want to take us out of those feelings when they occur. For example, a person struggling with the decision to stay in an unfulfilling relationship or leave has a polarization. Certain parts have reasons to stay, while opposing parts have reasons to end the relationship. Understandably, there are emotions connected with each side of this decision, and exiled feelings of not being good enough and fear of loneliness. Managers use the person’s body to express anxiety to keep them from feeling hurt, sadness, and unworthiness. While the person remains in the relationship, they may experience an upset stomach, tension headaches, and sustained nervous energy. These experiences are polarized with firefighters who are triggered when the managers’ attempts to control these undesirable emotions fail. To douse the unwanted feelings of not being good enough, firefighters use physical arousal of food or alcohol. Due to the polarization, each side will fight to control the person, creating a vicious cycle of physical bodily upset followed by the use of food or alcohol for emotional numbing.	Как мы видели в главе 7, мы поляризованы, когда две части или группы частей находятся в противоречии и имеют ограниченный доступ к Самости. Каждая сторона поляризации боится, что другая сторона захватит власть, что приводит к борьбе за власть. Наиболее распространенная поляризация – между менеджером и пожарным. Роль менеджера состоит в том, чтобы не дать нам испытывать болезненные эмоции и уязвимость, в то время как пожарные хотят избавить нас от этих чувств, когда они возникают. Например, человек, который борется с решением остаться в неудовлетворительных отношениях или уйти, имеет поляризацию. У определенных частей есть причины остаться, в то время как у противоположных частей есть причины прекратить отношения. Понятно, что с каждой стороной этого решения связаны эмоции, а также изгнанное чувство недостаточности и страха одиночества. Менеджеры используют тело человека, чтобы выразить беспокойство и удержать его от чувства обиды, печали и никчемности. Пока человек остается в отношениях, он может испытывать расстройство желудка, головные боли напряжения и постоянную нервную энергию. Эти переживания поляризованы у пожарных, которые срабатывают, когда попытки менеджеров контролировать эти нежелательные эмоции терпят неудачу. Чтобы подавить нежелательное чувство собственной недостаточности, пожарные используют физическое возбуждение с помощью еды или алкоголя. Из-за поляризации каждая сторона будет бороться за контроль над человеком, создавая порочный круг физических телесных расстройств, за которыми следует употребление еды или алкоголя для эмоционального оцепенения.	As we saw in Chapter 7, we are polarized when two parts or groups of parts are in opposition with little access to Self. Each side of the polarization fears the other side taking over, which leads to a power struggle. The most common polarization is that between a manager and a firefighter. The manager’s role is to keep us from experiencing painful emotions and vulnerability, while firefighters want to take us out of those feelings when they occur. For example, a person struggling with the decision to stay in an unfulfilling relationship or leave has a polarization. Certain parts have reasons to stay, while opposing parts have reasons to end the relationship. Understandably, there are emotions connected with each side of this decision, and exiled feelings of not being good enough and fear of loneliness. Managers use the person’s body to express anxiety to keep them from feeling hurt, sadness, and unworthiness. While the person remains in the relationship, they may experience an upset stomach, tension headaches, and sustained nervous energy. These experiences are polarized with firefighters who are triggered when the managers’ attempts to control these undesirable emotions fail. To douse the unwanted feelings of not being good enough, firefighters use physical arousal of food or alcohol. Due to the polarization, each side will fight to control the person, creating a vicious cycle of physical bodily upset followed by the use of food or alcohol for emotional numbing.
IFS CONCEPT 4: SELF AND THE BODY	IFS CONCEPT 4: SELF AND THE BODY	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 4: Я И ТЕЛО	IFS CONCEPT 4: SELF AND THE BODY
In Chapter 4, we learned that Self is the healing agent in the system, and we talked about the eight qualities of Self that the system embodies when parts relax and unblend. There are both similarities and differences between the physical expression of the eight qualities of Self in the body. Let’s look at each of the qualities and how they express in the body. This list is not exhaustive. As you read through it, consider how your system embodies the qualities of Self.	In Chapter 4, we learned that Self is the healing agent in the system, and we talked about the eight qualities of Self that the system embodies when parts relax and unblend. There are both similarities and differences between the physical expression of the eight qualities of Self in the body. Let’s look at each of the qualities and how they express in the body. This list is not exhaustive. As you read through it, consider how your system embodies the qualities of Self.	В главе 4 мы узнали, что «Я» является исцеляющим агентом в системе, и говорили о восьми качествах «Я», которые воплощает система, когда части расслабляются и разъединяются. Между физическим выражением восьми качеств «Я» в теле есть как сходства, так и различия. Давайте рассмотрим каждое из качеств и то, как они выражаются в теле. Этот список не является исчерпывающим. Читая ее, подумайте, как ваша система воплощает качества Самости.	In Chapter 4, we learned that Self is the healing agent in the system, and we talked about the eight qualities of Self that the system embodies when parts relax and unblend. There are both similarities and differences between the physical expression of the eight qualities of Self in the body. Let’s look at each of the qualities and how they express in the body. This list is not exhaustive. As you read through it, consider how your system embodies the qualities of Self.
Calm is experienced as emotionally and mentally relaxed with a decrease in heart rate, blood pressure, muscle tension, and breathing, creating a feeling of a relaxed mind and body. Clarity is embodied as feeling present, focused, and spacious. Compassion expresses in the body as openheartedness, feeling with another person or part, and an energy toward helping. Confidence is present in the body as a belief in yourself, trusting and accepting yourself, or inner knowing of your abilities. Connectedness embodies ease and comfort with another person or part and feelings of being valued, seen, heard, and validated. Courage is experienced in the body as mental and emotional strength and the ability to overcome fear and act. Creativity expresses as a feeling of being “in flow” or “in the zone.” Curiosity embodies openness to learn more and inquisitiveness. It is good practice to notice how Self embodies your system. This will help you to know when Self is leading versus when parts are in the driver’s seat.	Calm is experienced as emotionally and mentally relaxed with a decrease in heart rate, blood pressure, muscle tension, and breathing, creating a feeling of a relaxed mind and body. Clarity is embodied as feeling present, focused, and spacious. Compassion expresses in the body as openheartedness, feeling with another person or part, and an energy toward helping. Confidence is present in the body as a belief in yourself, trusting and accepting yourself, or inner knowing of your abilities. Connectedness embodies ease and comfort with another person or part and feelings of being valued, seen, heard, and validated. Courage is experienced in the body as mental and emotional strength and the ability to overcome fear and act. Creativity expresses as a feeling of being “in flow” or “in the zone.” Curiosity embodies openness to learn more and inquisitiveness. It is good practice to notice how Self embodies your system. This will help you to know when Self is leading versus when parts are in the driver’s seat.	Спокойствие переживается как эмоциональное и умственное расслабление с уменьшением частоты сердечных сокращений, артериального давления, мышечного напряжения и дыхания, что создает ощущение расслабленности ума и тела. Ясность воплощается в ощущении присутствия, сосредоточенности и простора. Сострадание выражается в теле как открытость сердца, чувство к другому человеку или его части, а также энергия, направленная на помощь. Уверенность присутствует в теле как вера в себя, доверие и принятие себя или внутреннее знание своих способностей. Связанность воплощает в себе легкость и комфорт с другим человеком или его частью, а также ощущение того, что тебя ценят, видят, слышат и признают. Смелость переживается телом как умственная и эмоциональная сила, а также способность преодолевать страх и действовать. Креативность выражается как ощущение пребывания «в потоке» или «в зоне». Любопытство воплощает в себе готовность узнать больше и любознательность. Хорошей практикой будет обратить внимание на то, как «Я» воплощает вашу систему. Это поможет вам узнать, когда лидирует «Я», а не когда за рулем находятся детали.	Calm is experienced as emotionally and mentally relaxed with a decrease in heart rate, blood pressure, muscle tension, and breathing, creating a feeling of a relaxed mind and body. Clarity is embodied as feeling present, focused, and spacious. Compassion expresses in the body as openheartedness, feeling with another person or part, and an energy toward helping. Confidence is present in the body as a belief in yourself, trusting and accepting yourself, or inner knowing of your abilities. Connectedness embodies ease and comfort with another person or part and feelings of being valued, seen, heard, and validated. Courage is experienced in the body as mental and emotional strength and the ability to overcome fear and act. Creativity expresses as a feeling of being “in flow” or “in the zone.” Curiosity embodies openness to learn more and inquisitiveness. It is good practice to notice how Self embodies your system. This will help you to know when Self is leading versus when parts are in the driver’s seat.
Case Vignette: A Dose of Nausea	Case Vignette: A Dose of Nausea	Пример из случая: Доза тошноты	Case Vignette: A Dose of Nausea
Nausea, retching, and with some clients, vomiting, presents as a powerful and effective firefighter for emergent exile energy. These physical reactions quickly change the focus from the work at hand to what’s happening in the body. Sherrie, a white 32-year-old female, was referred to me by her OB/GYN provider for postpartum depression. She had given birth to her third child four months earlier. Her symptoms included depressed mood most days, uncontrollable crying, a desire to “be left alone and sleep,” loss of appetite, and shame about not feeling close to her youngest child as she did to her older children. She also experienced pelvic pain with no physical cause found by her medical doctors.	Nausea, retching, and with some clients, vomiting, presents as a powerful and effective firefighter for emergent exile energy. These physical reactions quickly change the focus from the work at hand to what’s happening in the body. Sherrie, a white 32-year-old female, was referred to me by her OB/GYN provider for postpartum depression. She had given birth to her third child four months earlier. Her symptoms included depressed mood most days, uncontrollable crying, a desire to “be left alone and sleep,” loss of appetite, and shame about not feeling close to her youngest child as she did to her older children. She also experienced pelvic pain with no physical cause found by her medical doctors.	Тошнота, рвота, а у некоторых клиентов и рвота, являются мощными и эффективными средствами борьбы с возникающей энергией изгнания. Эти физические реакции быстро переключают внимание с текущей работы на то, что происходит в организме. Шерри, 32-летняя белая женщина, была направлена ​​ко мне своим акушером-гинекологом по поводу послеродовой депрессии. Четыре месяца назад она родила третьего ребенка. Ее симптомы включали депрессивное настроение большую часть дня, неконтролируемый плач, желание «остаться в покое и поспать», потерю аппетита и стыд из-за того, что она не чувствовала близости со своим младшим ребенком, как со старшими детьми. Она также испытывала боль в области таза, врачи которой не обнаружили физической причины.	Nausea, retching, and with some clients, vomiting, presents as a powerful and effective firefighter for emergent exile energy. These physical reactions quickly change the focus from the work at hand to what’s happening in the body. Sherrie, a white 32-year-old female, was referred to me by her OB/GYN provider for postpartum depression. She had given birth to her third child four months earlier. Her symptoms included depressed mood most days, uncontrollable crying, a desire to “be left alone and sleep,” loss of appetite, and shame about not feeling close to her youngest child as she did to her older children. She also experienced pelvic pain with no physical cause found by her medical doctors.
We started our work with the part of her who was having difficulty bonding with her child. This is what she found most upsetting. We spent several sessions building trust and relationship with this part. When she focused on it, she found it in her lower pelvic area and described it as a reddish-orange fiery ball that caused pain. During our session, we had to ask the part to unblend a bit by reducing the intensity of the pain to allow Sherrie to be with it. It took several attempts to get the part to titrate the pain to a level that was tolerable for Sherrie. Once this was accomplished, we learned that the part believed that Sherrie was incapable of taking care of her baby because she was incapable of taking care of herself. Therefore, the part renders her unable to function. She has low energy because she’s not eating and she’s sleeping a lot, which makes her less available to take care of her child, and her shame about not bonding with her baby is also connected to a fear that she might hurt her child in some way.	We started our work with the part of her who was having difficulty bonding with her child. This is what she found most upsetting. We spent several sessions building trust and relationship with this part. When she focused on it, she found it in her lower pelvic area and described it as a reddish-orange fiery ball that caused pain. During our session, we had to ask the part to unblend a bit by reducing the intensity of the pain to allow Sherrie to be with it. It took several attempts to get the part to titrate the pain to a level that was tolerable for Sherrie. Once this was accomplished, we learned that the part believed that Sherrie was incapable of taking care of her baby because she was incapable of taking care of herself. Therefore, the part renders her unable to function. She has low energy because she’s not eating and she’s sleeping a lot, which makes her less available to take care of her child, and her shame about not bonding with her baby is also connected to a fear that she might hurt her child in some way.	Мы начали нашу работу с той ее части, которая испытывала трудности в общении с ребенком. Это ее больше всего расстроило. Мы провели несколько сессий, выстраивая доверие и отношения с этой частью. Когда она сосредоточилась на нем, то обнаружила его в нижней части таза и описала как красновато-оранжевый огненный шар, вызывающий боль. Во время сеанса нам пришлось попросить эту часть немного расслабиться, уменьшив интенсивность боли, чтобы позволить Шерри остаться с ней. Потребовалось несколько попыток, чтобы деталь смогла снизить боль до уровня, приемлемого для Шерри. Как только это было достигнуто, мы узнали, что часть считала Шерри неспособной позаботиться о своем ребенке, потому что она была неспособна позаботиться о себе. Таким образом, эта часть делает ее неспособной функционировать. У нее низкий уровень энергии, потому что она не ест и много спит, что делает ее менее готовой заботиться о своем ребенке, а ее стыд из-за того, что она не привязана к своему ребенку, также связан со страхом, что она может каким-то образом навредить своему ребенку. .	We started our work with the part of her who was having difficulty bonding with her child. This is what she found most upsetting. We spent several sessions building trust and relationship with this part. When she focused on it, she found it in her lower pelvic area and described it as a reddish-orange fiery ball that caused pain. During our session, we had to ask the part to unblend a bit by reducing the intensity of the pain to allow Sherrie to be with it. It took several attempts to get the part to titrate the pain to a level that was tolerable for Sherrie. Once this was accomplished, we learned that the part believed that Sherrie was incapable of taking care of her baby because she was incapable of taking care of herself. Therefore, the part renders her unable to function. She has low energy because she’s not eating and she’s sleeping a lot, which makes her less available to take care of her child, and her shame about not bonding with her baby is also connected to a fear that she might hurt her child in some way.
It seemed to me that this part did not know Sherrie was an adult. Its view of her appeared juvenile. I asked Sherrie to ask the part, “How old do you think I am?” The part answered, “Three or four.” I asked Sherrie to ask the part to look at her to see if it could see that she was a grown-up now. The part still saw her as a child. Next, I had her tell the part her age and share with the part what had happened in her life since she was three or four. Sherrie did this by showing the part highlights of her life like a movie. The part expressed surprise and amazement at her success and ability to take care of herself.	It seemed to me that this part did not know Sherrie was an adult. Its view of her appeared juvenile. I asked Sherrie to ask the part, “How old do you think I am?” The part answered, “Three or four.” I asked Sherrie to ask the part to look at her to see if it could see that she was a grown-up now. The part still saw her as a child. Next, I had her tell the part her age and share with the part what had happened in her life since she was three or four. Sherrie did this by showing the part highlights of her life like a movie. The part expressed surprise and amazement at her success and ability to take care of herself.	Мне казалось, что эта часть не знала, что Шерри взрослая. Ее взгляд на нее казался юношеским. Я попросил Шерри спросить эту роль: «Как ты думаешь, сколько мне лет?» Часть ответила: «Три или четыре». Я попросил Шерри попросить часть посмотреть на нее и проверить, видит ли она, что она теперь взрослая. Часть все еще видела ее ребенком. Затем я попросил ее рассказать части свой возраст и рассказать ей, что произошло в ее жизни с тех пор, как ей было три или четыре года. Шерри сделала это, показав самые яркие моменты своей жизни, как в кино. Часть выразила удивление и изумление ее успехами и способностью позаботиться о себе.	It seemed to me that this part did not know Sherrie was an adult. Its view of her appeared juvenile. I asked Sherrie to ask the part, “How old do you think I am?” The part answered, “Three or four.” I asked Sherrie to ask the part to look at her to see if it could see that she was a grown-up now. The part still saw her as a child. Next, I had her tell the part her age and share with the part what had happened in her life since she was three or four. Sherrie did this by showing the part highlights of her life like a movie. The part expressed surprise and amazement at her success and ability to take care of herself.
We found out that the part took on its role of protecting Sherrie from things it believed she couldn’t handle around age four by making her sad. When asked what caused it to protect in this way, it shared, “Sherrie had a slew of different babysitters and . . .” Mid-sentence of the part’s sharing, Sherrie said, “I feel nauseous.” She started to sway in her seat, with her head seemingly being rocked on her neck involuntarily. She brought her hand to her mouth, and beads of perspiration were forming on her forehead and top lip. I asked if she was present with this part. She responded, “Barely.” I asked if I could speak directly to the part. She nodded. I asked the part, “What are you reacting to?” The part answered, “To all of this—it is too much for her.” Curious I asked, “What’s too much?” The part responded, “I have to keep her from being hurt.” I questioned, “What will hurt her?” The nausea seemed to intensify; Sherrie began sweating more and her stomach started to jerk. I asked the part if it would decrease the nausea. It refused emphatically. Curious about its refusal, I asked, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t make Sherrie sick and nauseated?” Firmly the part stated, “Sherrie can’t handle what happened. I keep that hidden. If I don’t stop her . . .” Holding her mouth, Sherrie bolted from her seat and retreated to the bathroom connected to my office. I could hear her retching and spitting. After about a minute, I heard the faucet running. She returned with a wet paper towel, dabbing her forehead and cheeks. She grabbed her purse, said a quick, “I’m sorry,” and rushed from my office.	We found out that the part took on its role of protecting Sherrie from things it believed she couldn’t handle around age four by making her sad. When asked what caused it to protect in this way, it shared, “Sherrie had a slew of different babysitters and . . .” Mid-sentence of the part’s sharing, Sherrie said, “I feel nauseous.” She started to sway in her seat, with her head seemingly being rocked on her neck involuntarily. She brought her hand to her mouth, and beads of perspiration were forming on her forehead and top lip. I asked if she was present with this part. She responded, “Barely.” I asked if I could speak directly to the part. She nodded. I asked the part, “What are you reacting to?” The part answered, “To all of this—it is too much for her.” Curious I asked, “What’s too much?” The part responded, “I have to keep her from being hurt.” I questioned, “What will hurt her?” The nausea seemed to intensify; Sherrie began sweating more and her stomach started to jerk. I asked the part if it would decrease the nausea. It refused emphatically. Curious about its refusal, I asked, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t make Sherrie sick and nauseated?” Firmly the part stated, “Sherrie can’t handle what happened. I keep that hidden. If I don’t stop her . . .” Holding her mouth, Sherrie bolted from her seat and retreated to the bathroom connected to my office. I could hear her retching and spitting. After about a minute, I heard the faucet running. She returned with a wet paper towel, dabbing her forehead and cheeks. She grabbed her purse, said a quick, “I’m sorry,” and rushed from my office.	Мы выяснили, что эта роль взяла на себя роль защиты Шерри от вещей, с которыми, по ее мнению, она не могла справиться примерно в четыре года, заставляя ее грустить. Когда его спросили, что заставило его защищаться таким образом, он ответил: «У Шерри было множество разных нянь и… . ». В середине предложения Шерри сказала: «Меня тошнит». Она начала покачиваться на своем сиденье, ее голова, казалось, непроизвольно покачивалась на шее. Она поднесла руку ко рту, и на ее лбу и верхней губе выступили капельки пота. Я спросил, присутствовала ли она с этой ролью. Она ответила: «Едва». Я спросил, могу ли я поговорить напрямую с этой частью. Она кивнула. Я спросил часть: «На что ты реагируешь?» Часть ответила: «Все это — для нее это слишком». Я с любопытством спросил: «Что слишком много?» Часть ответила: «Я должна уберечь ее от боли». Я спросил: «Что ей повредит?» Тошнота, казалось, усилилась; Шерри начала сильнее потеть, и ее живот начал дергаться. Я спросил часть, уменьшит ли это тошноту. Оно категорически отказалось. Заинтересовавшись его отказом, я спросил: «Чего вы боитесь, если бы вы не вызвали у Шерри тошноту и тошноту?» В этой части твердо говорилось: «Шерри не может справиться с тем, что произошло. Я держу это в тайне. Если я не остановлю ее. . ». Зажав рот, Шерри вскочила со своего места и направилась в ванную, примыкающую к моему кабинету. Я слышал, как она блевала и плевалась. Примерно через минуту я услышал, как работает кран. Она вернулась с мокрым бумажным полотенцем, вытирая лоб и щеки. Она схватила сумочку, быстро сказала: «Мне очень жаль» и выбежала из моего офиса.	We found out that the part took on its role of protecting Sherrie from things it believed she couldn’t handle around age four by making her sad. When asked what caused it to protect in this way, it shared, “Sherrie had a slew of different babysitters and . . .” Mid-sentence of the part’s sharing, Sherrie said, “I feel nauseous.” She started to sway in her seat, with her head seemingly being rocked on her neck involuntarily. She brought her hand to her mouth, and beads of perspiration were forming on her forehead and top lip. I asked if she was present with this part. She responded, “Barely.” I asked if I could speak directly to the part. She nodded. I asked the part, “What are you reacting to?” The part answered, “To all of this—it is too much for her.” Curious I asked, “What’s too much?” The part responded, “I have to keep her from being hurt.” I questioned, “What will hurt her?” The nausea seemed to intensify; Sherrie began sweating more and her stomach started to jerk. I asked the part if it would decrease the nausea. It refused emphatically. Curious about its refusal, I asked, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t make Sherrie sick and nauseated?” Firmly the part stated, “Sherrie can’t handle what happened. I keep that hidden. If I don’t stop her . . .” Holding her mouth, Sherrie bolted from her seat and retreated to the bathroom connected to my office. I could hear her retching and spitting. After about a minute, I heard the faucet running. She returned with a wet paper towel, dabbing her forehead and cheeks. She grabbed her purse, said a quick, “I’m sorry,” and rushed from my office.
Sherrie’s parts used her body in multiple ways. Her manager parts expressed in her body through uncontrollable crying, a loss of appetite, and intense pelvic pain to keep her from experiencing emotional pain and vulnerability. The nausea-causing firefighter took hold of her body with overwhelming nausea, sweating, and retching. This firefighter believed it must take her out to keep experiences from her consciousness. This part continued to show up in future sessions anytime we approached talking about the babysitters. Due to Sherrie’s willingness to heal and recover from postpartum depression, we were able to eventually build a Self-to-part relationship with the nausea-causing firefighter and heal the exile under its protection.	Sherrie’s parts used her body in multiple ways. Her manager parts expressed in her body through uncontrollable crying, a loss of appetite, and intense pelvic pain to keep her from experiencing emotional pain and vulnerability. The nausea-causing firefighter took hold of her body with overwhelming nausea, sweating, and retching. This firefighter believed it must take her out to keep experiences from her consciousness. This part continued to show up in future sessions anytime we approached talking about the babysitters. Due to Sherrie’s willingness to heal and recover from postpartum depression, we were able to eventually build a Self-to-part relationship with the nausea-causing firefighter and heal the exile under its protection.	Части Шерри использовали ее тело по-разному. Ее менеджерские части выражаются в ее теле через неконтролируемый плач, потерю аппетита и сильную боль в области таза, чтобы удержать ее от переживания эмоциональной боли и уязвимости. Вызвавший тошноту пожарный схватил ее тело, ощущая непреодолимую тошноту, потливость и рвоту. Этот пожарный считал, что ее нужно вывести, чтобы скрыть переживания от ее сознания. Эта часть продолжала появляться в будущих сеансах каждый раз, когда мы подходили к разговору о нянях. Благодаря желанию Шерри исцелиться и выздороветь от послеродовой депрессии, мы смогли в конечном итоге построить отношения «Сам-расставание» с пожарным, вызывающим тошноту, и исцелить изгнанника под его защитой.	Sherrie’s parts used her body in multiple ways. Her manager parts expressed in her body through uncontrollable crying, a loss of appetite, and intense pelvic pain to keep her from experiencing emotional pain and vulnerability. The nausea-causing firefighter took hold of her body with overwhelming nausea, sweating, and retching. This firefighter believed it must take her out to keep experiences from her consciousness. This part continued to show up in future sessions anytime we approached talking about the babysitters. Due to Sherrie’s willingness to heal and recover from postpartum depression, we were able to eventually build a Self-to-part relationship with the nausea-causing firefighter and heal the exile under its protection.
Meditation: Waterfall	Meditation: Waterfall	Медитация: Водопад	Meditation: Waterfall
Waterfall is the eighth meditation co-created with my ancestors. I have parts that communicate with me through my body. I shared one such part, Antsy, in Chapters 5 and 6. At times, I am not even aware of their presence as a part because the physical experience can be overwhelming and even terrifying. This meditation helps me to listen to parts who show up in my body. As with the other meditations they co-created with me, I found it surprising how well my ancestors know me and what I need.	Waterfall is the eighth meditation co-created with my ancestors. I have parts that communicate with me through my body. I shared one such part, Antsy, in Chapters 5 and 6. At times, I am not even aware of their presence as a part because the physical experience can be overwhelming and even terrifying. This meditation helps me to listen to parts who show up in my body. As with the other meditations they co-created with me, I found it surprising how well my ancestors know me and what I need.	Водопад — восьмая медитация, созданная совместно с моими предками. У меня есть части, которые общаются со мной через мое тело. Об одной такой части, Antsy, я рассказал в главах 5 и 6. Иногда я даже не осознаю их присутствия как части, потому что физический опыт может быть ошеломляющим и даже пугающим. Эта медитация помогает мне прислушиваться к частям моего тела. Как и в случае с другими медитациями, которые они создали вместе со мной, меня удивило, насколько хорошо мои предки знают меня и то, что мне нужно.	Waterfall is the eighth meditation co-created with my ancestors. I have parts that communicate with me through my body. I shared one such part, Antsy, in Chapters 5 and 6. At times, I am not even aware of their presence as a part because the physical experience can be overwhelming and even terrifying. This meditation helps me to listen to parts who show up in my body. As with the other meditations they co-created with me, I found it surprising how well my ancestors know me and what I need.
For this meditation, you may want to lie down; however, it can be done sitting up also. This is a parts awareness meditation. Parts can show up in various places in our bodies. This meditation will help you to discover their location in your body and how parts are experienced in your body. If you do not notice a part in a particular location of your body, that’s okay; simply allow your awareness to rest on that part of your body.	For this meditation, you may want to lie down; however, it can be done sitting up also. This is a parts awareness meditation. Parts can show up in various places in our bodies. This meditation will help you to discover their location in your body and how parts are experienced in your body. If you do not notice a part in a particular location of your body, that’s okay; simply allow your awareness to rest on that part of your body.	Для этой медитации вы можете лечь; однако это можно делать и сидя. Это медитация осознания частей. Части могут появляться в разных местах нашего тела. Эта медитация поможет вам обнаружить их расположение в вашем теле и то, как части тела ощущаются в вашем теле. Если вы не замечаете какой-либо части тела в определенном месте, это нормально; просто позвольте своему сознанию остановиться на этой части тела.	For this meditation, you may want to lie down; however, it can be done sitting up also. This is a parts awareness meditation. Parts can show up in various places in our bodies. This meditation will help you to discover their location in your body and how parts are experienced in your body. If you do not notice a part in a particular location of your body, that’s okay; simply allow your awareness to rest on that part of your body.
Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Закройте глаза или смягчите взгляд.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.
Adjust your body in whatever way is needed for you to become comfortable.	Adjust your body in whatever way is needed for you to become comfortable.	Настройте свое тело так, как вам необходимо, чтобы вам было комфортно.	Adjust your body in whatever way is needed for you to become comfortable.
Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.	Перенесите свое осознание на свое дыхание и просто дышите.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.
If it feels right and helps you relax, breathe in for four counts and breathe out for four counts; you can do this several times.	If it feels right and helps you relax, breathe in for four counts and breathe out for four counts; you can do this several times.	Если это кажется вам правильным и помогает вам расслабиться, вдохните на четыре счета и выдохните на четыре счета; вы можете сделать это несколько раз.	If it feels right and helps you relax, breathe in for four counts and breathe out for four counts; you can do this several times.
Imagine yourself in the presence of a magnificent waterfall.	Imagine yourself in the presence of a magnificent waterfall.	Представьте себя перед великолепным водопадом.	Imagine yourself in the presence of a magnificent waterfall.
You admire its power, grace, and majesty.	You admire its power, grace, and majesty.	Вы восхищаетесь его силой, грацией и величием.	You admire its power, grace, and majesty.
You feel the spray of its mist on your face.	You feel the spray of its mist on your face.	Вы чувствуете брызги его тумана на своем лице.	You feel the spray of its mist on your face.
Deciding to lie at its feet, you find a soft patch of grass.	Deciding to lie at its feet, you find a soft patch of grass.	Решив лечь у его ног, вы обнаруживаете мягкий участок травы.	Deciding to lie at its feet, you find a soft patch of grass.
With your eyes closed, you begin to calm as the earth cradles you in its arms.	With your eyes closed, you begin to calm as the earth cradles you in its arms.	Закрыв глаза, вы начинаете успокаиваться, когда земля укачивает вас в своих объятиях.	With your eyes closed, you begin to calm as the earth cradles you in its arms.
The melody of the waterfall lulls you deeper inside.	The melody of the waterfall lulls you deeper inside.	Мелодия водопада убаюкивает вас глубже внутри.	The melody of the waterfall lulls you deeper inside.
Bring your attention to your feet and toes.	Bring your attention to your feet and toes.	Перенесите внимание на ступни и пальцы ног.	Bring your attention to your feet and toes.
Notice how they feel: acknowledge any parts in your feet and toes.	Notice how they feel: acknowledge any parts in your feet and toes.	Обратите внимание на то, как они себя чувствуют: обратите внимание на любые части ваших ступней и пальцев ног.	Notice how they feel: acknowledge any parts in your feet and toes.
Focus on the part or parts you notice there.	Focus on the part or parts you notice there.	Сосредоточьтесь на той части или частях, которые вы там заметили.	Focus on the part or parts you notice there.
As you focus, what more do you notice?	As you focus, what more do you notice?	Когда вы сосредотачиваетесь, что еще вы замечаете?	As you focus, what more do you notice?
Move your attention to your legs. Notice how they feel.	Move your attention to your legs. Notice how they feel.	Переместите внимание на ноги. Обратите внимание на то, что они чувствуют.	Move your attention to your legs. Notice how they feel.
Bring your attention to any parts that use your legs; for now, just allow them to be there while you focus on them.	Bring your attention to any parts that use your legs; for now, just allow them to be there while you focus on them.	Обратите внимание на все части тела, которые задействуют ваши ноги; а пока просто позвольте им быть рядом, пока вы сосредотачиваетесь на них.	Bring your attention to any parts that use your legs; for now, just allow them to be there while you focus on them.
How do you feel toward the parts you notice in your legs?	How do you feel toward the parts you notice in your legs?	Что вы чувствуете по отношению к тем частям, которые замечаете на своих ногах?	How do you feel toward the parts you notice in your legs?
Move your awareness to your thighs, what do you notice here? Which parts live in your thighs?	Move your awareness to your thighs, what do you notice here? Which parts live in your thighs?	Переместите свое внимание на бедра. Что вы здесь заметили? Какие части живут в ваших бедрах?	Move your awareness to your thighs, what do you notice here? Which parts live in your thighs?
Now move to your sit bone. Breathe into this area of your body and see what you notice. Be with whatever you find there.	Now move to your sit bone. Breathe into this area of your body and see what you notice. Be with whatever you find there.	Теперь перейдите к седалищной кости. Дышите в эту область вашего тела и посмотрите, что вы заметите. Будьте со всем, что вы там найдете.	Now move to your sit bone. Breathe into this area of your body and see what you notice. Be with whatever you find there.
Bring your attention to your hips. Notice and allow whatever is present.	Bring your attention to your hips. Notice and allow whatever is present.	Перенесите внимание на бедра. Замечайте и позволяйте всему, что присутствует.	Bring your attention to your hips. Notice and allow whatever is present.
As you pay more attention to your hips, what do you experience?	As you pay more attention to your hips, what do you experience?	Что вы испытываете, уделяя больше внимания бедрам?	As you pay more attention to your hips, what do you experience?
Move your awareness around to your stomach or abdomen area. Notice if there are any sensations here, not to change them, just to bring awareness.	Move your awareness around to your stomach or abdomen area. Notice if there are any sensations here, not to change them, just to bring awareness.	Переместите свое внимание на живот или область живота. Обратите внимание, есть ли здесь какие-либо ощущения, но не для того, чтобы их изменить, а просто для того, чтобы внести осознанность.	Move your awareness around to your stomach or abdomen area. Notice if there are any sensations here, not to change them, just to bring awareness.
How do you feel toward what you’re experiencing in your stomach?	How do you feel toward what you’re experiencing in your stomach?	Как вы относитесь к тому, что испытываете в желудке?	How do you feel toward what you’re experiencing in your stomach?
Take your attention around to your back. Take your time moving up and down your back noticing any sensations, tightness, or tension.	Take your attention around to your back. Take your time moving up and down your back noticing any sensations, tightness, or tension.	Переведите свое внимание на спину. Не торопитесь, двигаясь вверх и вниз по спине, замечая любые ощущения, стеснение или напряжение.	Take your attention around to your back. Take your time moving up and down your back noticing any sensations, tightness, or tension.
Travel from your back up to your shoulders. What do you notice here? Are your shoulders up near your ears? Are they relaxed and loose? Whatever you notice is okay.	Travel from your back up to your shoulders. What do you notice here? Are your shoulders up near your ears? Are they relaxed and loose? Whatever you notice is okay.	Двигайтесь от спины до плеч. Что вы здесь заметили? Ваши плечи приподняты возле ушей? Они расслаблены и свободны? Все, что вы замечаете, это нормально.	Travel from your back up to your shoulders. What do you notice here? Are your shoulders up near your ears? Are they relaxed and loose? Whatever you notice is okay.
Move your awareness to your heart. Feel your heartbeat. Is your heart space open, closed, tight, warm, or expansive? Notice and allow what’s happening.	Move your awareness to your heart. Feel your heartbeat. Is your heart space open, closed, tight, warm, or expansive? Notice and allow what’s happening.	Переместите свое осознание в свое сердце. Почувствуйте свое сердцебиение. Пространство вашего сердца открытое, закрытое, тесное, теплое или обширное? Замечайте и позволяйте происходящему.	Move your awareness to your heart. Feel your heartbeat. Is your heart space open, closed, tight, warm, or expansive? Notice and allow what’s happening.
Pull your awareness down your arms and into your hands. Notice whatever is present. How do parts use your arms or hands?	Pull your awareness down your arms and into your hands. Notice whatever is present. How do parts use your arms or hands?	Потяните свое осознание вниз по рукам и в ладони. Обратите внимание на все, что присутствует. Как части используют ваши руки или кисти?	Pull your awareness down your arms and into your hands. Notice whatever is present. How do parts use your arms or hands?
Focus on those parts and see what else you notice.	Focus on those parts and see what else you notice.	Сосредоточьтесь на этих частях и посмотрите, что еще вы заметите.	Focus on those parts and see what else you notice.
Move your attention to your throat. Notice the air as it passes through your throat. Are there parts that use your throat? Focus on those parts. Be with what you find here.	Move your attention to your throat. Notice the air as it passes through your throat. Are there parts that use your throat? Focus on those parts. Be with what you find here.	Переместите внимание на горло. Обратите внимание на воздух, проходящий через горло. Есть ли части, которые используют ваше горло? Сосредоточьтесь на этих частях. Будьте с тем, что вы найдете здесь.	Move your attention to your throat. Notice the air as it passes through your throat. Are there parts that use your throat? Focus on those parts. Be with what you find here.
Pull your awareness up to your face and jaw. Can you feel your expression? Is your jaw tight or relaxed? Just notice.	Pull your awareness up to your face and jaw. Can you feel your expression? Is your jaw tight or relaxed? Just notice.	Поднимите свое внимание к лицу и челюсти. Чувствуете ли вы выражение своего лица? Ваша челюсть напряжена или расслаблена? Просто обратите внимание.	Pull your awareness up to your face and jaw. Can you feel your expression? Is your jaw tight or relaxed? Just notice.
Now to your eyes, ears, and forehead. Simply be with whatever is present. Notice the parts that show up in your eyes, ears, and forehead. How do you feel toward these parts?	Now to your eyes, ears, and forehead. Simply be with whatever is present. Notice the parts that show up in your eyes, ears, and forehead. How do you feel toward these parts?	Теперь о ваших глазах, ушах и лбу. Просто будьте с тем, что присутствует. Обратите внимание на части, которые появляются в ваших глазах, ушах и лбу. Как вы относитесь к этим местам?	Now to your eyes, ears, and forehead. Simply be with whatever is present. Notice the parts that show up in your eyes, ears, and forehead. How do you feel toward these parts?
Bring your attention to the top of your head. What do you sense here? As you focus on the top of your head, what more do you notice? Breathe into the top of your head.	Bring your attention to the top of your head. What do you sense here? As you focus on the top of your head, what more do you notice? Breathe into the top of your head.	Перенесите свое внимание на макушку головы. Что вы здесь чувствуете? Когда вы фокусируетесь на макушке головы, что еще вы замечаете? Дышите в макушку головы.	Bring your attention to the top of your head. What do you sense here? As you focus on the top of your head, what more do you notice? Breathe into the top of your head.
Breathe into your whole body, noticing your entire body breathing. Every single part you noticed is breathing.	Breathe into your whole body, noticing your entire body breathing. Every single part you noticed is breathing.	Дышите всем телом, замечая, как дышит все тело. Каждая часть, которую вы заметили, является дыханием.	Breathe into your whole body, noticing your entire body breathing. Every single part you noticed is breathing.
Bring awareness to how your body feels. From the top of your head back down to your toes, scan each part and notice how your body feels.	Bring awareness to how your body feels. From the top of your head back down to your toes, scan each part and notice how your body feels.	Осознайте, что чувствует ваше тело. От макушки головы до пальцев ног сканируйте каждую часть и обратите внимание на ощущения вашего тела.	Bring awareness to how your body feels. From the top of your head back down to your toes, scan each part and notice how your body feels.
If there are parts you need to return to, set an intention with them to do so.	If there are parts you need to return to, set an intention with them to do so.	Если есть части, к которым вам нужно вернуться, поставьте перед ними намерение сделать это.	If there are parts you need to return to, set an intention with them to do so.
Express gratitude for what your parts shared.	Express gratitude for what your parts shared.	Выразите благодарность за то, чем поделились ваши части.	Express gratitude for what your parts shared.
Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	Направьте свое осознание на свое дыхание и дышите, возвращаясь в этот момент и пространство.	Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.
When it feels right, you can slowly open your eyes.	When it feels right, you can slowly open your eyes.	Когда вы почувствуете, что это правильно, вы можете медленно открыть глаза.	When it feels right, you can slowly open your eyes.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: Waterfall Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Waterfall Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Вопросы для журнала «Водопад»	Exercise 2: Waterfall Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Waterfall meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Waterfall meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того как вы выполнили медитацию «Водопад» и написали краткий дневник, потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, ответив на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Waterfall meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
What did you learn about your parts and how they express in your body?	What did you learn about your parts and how they express in your body?	Что вы узнали о своих частях и о том, как они выражаются в вашем теле?	What did you learn about your parts and how they express in your body?
How did your body feel at the end of this meditation?	How did your body feel at the end of this meditation?	Что чувствовало ваше тело в конце медитации?	How did your body feel at the end of this meditation?
What parts were most noticeable, and where were they located in your body?	What parts were most noticeable, and where were they located in your body?	Какие части вашего тела были наиболее заметными и где они располагались?	What parts were most noticeable, and where were they located in your body?
How might knowing how your parts use your body benefit you?	How might knowing how your parts use your body benefit you?	Какую пользу вам может принести знание того, как ваши части тела используют ваше тело?	How might knowing how your parts use your body benefit you?
Did you experience any familiar sensations in your body? If so, explain.	Did you experience any familiar sensations in your body? If so, explain.	Испытывали ли вы какие-либо знакомые ощущения в теле? Если да, объясните.	Did you experience any familiar sensations in your body? If so, explain.
Did you have any new or unfamiliar sensations in your body? If so, explain.	Did you have any new or unfamiliar sensations in your body? If so, explain.	Появились ли у вас какие-то новые или незнакомые ощущения в теле? Если да, объясните.	Did you have any new or unfamiliar sensations in your body? If so, explain.
Which parts did you commit to return to?	Which parts did you commit to return to?	В какие части вы обязались вернуться?	Which parts did you commit to return to?
Exercise 3: Naming the Sensations	Exercise 3: Naming the Sensations	Упражнение 3: Назовите ощущения	Exercise 3: Naming the Sensations
Using the table below as a guide, choose the words that describe the bodily sensations you experienced during the meditation. Write them in your journal.	Using the table below as a guide, choose the words that describe the bodily sensations you experienced during the meditation. Write them in your journal.	Используя приведенную ниже таблицу в качестве руководства, выберите слова, которые описывают телесные ощущения, которые вы испытали во время медитации. Запишите их в свой дневник.	Using the table below as a guide, choose the words that describe the bodily sensations you experienced during the meditation. Write them in your journal.
Achy Cold Jittery Queasy Still	Achy Cold Jittery Queasy Still	Больно холодно, нервно, тошнота, неподвижно.	Achy Cold Jittery Queasy Still
Airy Constricted Knotted Relaxed Sweaty	Airy Constricted Knotted Relaxed Sweaty	Воздушный Зауженный Узловатый Расслабленный Потный	Airy Constricted Knotted Relaxed Sweaty
Armored Dense Light Restricted Tearful	Armored Dense Light Restricted Tearful	Бронированный Плотный Легкий Ограниченный Плазменный	Armored Dense Light Restricted Tearful
Bloated Dizzy Nauseous Rigid Tender	Bloated Dizzy Nauseous Rigid Tender	Раздутый, головокружительный, тошнотворный, жесткий, болезненный.	Bloated Dizzy Nauseous Rigid Tender
Blocked Energized Numb Sensitive Tense	Blocked Energized Numb Sensitive Tense	Заблокированный Энергичный Онемевший Чувствительный Напряженный	Blocked Energized Numb Sensitive Tense
Burning Expansive Open Shaky Throbbing	Burning Expansive Open Shaky Throbbing	Жгучая, обширная, открытая, трясущаяся пульсация	Burning Expansive Open Shaky Throbbing
Butterflies Fiery Pounding Sharp Tickly	Butterflies Fiery Pounding Sharp Tickly	Бабочки Огненные Стучат Резко Щекотно	Butterflies Fiery Pounding Sharp Tickly
Clammy Heavy Pressure Sore Tight	Clammy Heavy Pressure Sore Tight	Липкая сильная пролежневая боль	Clammy Heavy Pressure Sore Tight
Clenched Hot Prickly Spacious Tingly	Clenched Hot Prickly Spacious Tingly	Сжатая, горячая, колючая, просторная, покалывает	Clenched Hot Prickly Spacious Tingly
Closed Itchy Pulsing Stiff Trembling	Closed Itchy Pulsing Stiff Trembling	Закрытое Зуд Пульсирующая Жесткая дрожь	Closed Itchy Pulsing Stiff Trembling
Add other sensations below:	Add other sensations below:	Добавьте другие ощущения ниже:	Add other sensations below:
Exercise 4: Where Parts Live in Your Body	Exercise 4: Where Parts Live in Your Body	Упражнение 4. Где в вашем теле живут части	Exercise 4: Where Parts Live in Your Body
In your journal, sketch a rough outline of your body, then indicate the place of your most dominant parts. Draw a line from that area of the body, and write a word or two to describe the sensations experienced in that area.	In your journal, sketch a rough outline of your body, then indicate the place of your most dominant parts. Draw a line from that area of the body, and write a word or two to describe the sensations experienced in that area.	В своем дневнике нарисуйте приблизительный контур своего тела, затем укажите места наиболее доминирующих частей. Проведите линию от этой области тела и напишите пару слов, описывающих ощущения, испытываемые в этой области.	In your journal, sketch a rough outline of your body, then indicate the place of your most dominant parts. Draw a line from that area of the body, and write a word or two to describe the sensations experienced in that area.
CHAPTER 9	CHAPTER 9	ГЛАВА 9	CHAPTER 9
The Weary One	The Weary One	Усталый	The Weary One
Helping Exhausted Parts	Helping Exhausted Parts	Помощь изношенным частям	Helping Exhausted Parts
When I was traveling with my husband in Mexico a few years ago, I became acutely aware of a part that got frustrated, agitated, irritable, and even angry when life didn’t go as planned. The first situation occurred on the ferry to Isla Holbox. I selected seats for us, but he beckoned me to seats further to the front and I moved to his preferred seats. The ferry continued to fill up, with few seats left by the time I put my bags away and settled in next to him. My seat was reclined. I tried to bring the seat back up, and it wouldn’t budge. It was broken. My husband reached across me to help. The seat didn’t move. I was sitting at an uncomfortable angle, and instantly I felt heat rising in my torso and face. I heard a voice say, “If we had stayed in the seats I chose, I wouldn’t be stuck in this broken seat.” I looked around the ferry for alternative seats; none were available. I started cussing under my breath and blaming my husband for my discomfort. I said to him in an accusatory tone, “We should have stayed in the other seats.” My perceptual field narrowed, and all I could see was him sitting comfortably and me uncomfortable. My body was tense and rigid. My mouth was tight with clenched teeth, my breathing was shallow, and my internal temperature rose. I was hot both physically and emotionally. I was twisting and turning, trying to find a satisfactory way to endure the 30-minute ride. My husband offered me his seat, and my part, in its highly irritable and angry state, growled, “No, I want this seat to work.”	When I was traveling with my husband in Mexico a few years ago, I became acutely aware of a part that got frustrated, agitated, irritable, and even angry when life didn’t go as planned. The first situation occurred on the ferry to Isla Holbox. I selected seats for us, but he beckoned me to seats further to the front and I moved to his preferred seats. The ferry continued to fill up, with few seats left by the time I put my bags away and settled in next to him. My seat was reclined. I tried to bring the seat back up, and it wouldn’t budge. It was broken. My husband reached across me to help. The seat didn’t move. I was sitting at an uncomfortable angle, and instantly I felt heat rising in my torso and face. I heard a voice say, “If we had stayed in the seats I chose, I wouldn’t be stuck in this broken seat.” I looked around the ferry for alternative seats; none were available. I started cussing under my breath and blaming my husband for my discomfort. I said to him in an accusatory tone, “We should have stayed in the other seats.” My perceptual field narrowed, and all I could see was him sitting comfortably and me uncomfortable. My body was tense and rigid. My mouth was tight with clenched teeth, my breathing was shallow, and my internal temperature rose. I was hot both physically and emotionally. I was twisting and turning, trying to find a satisfactory way to endure the 30-minute ride. My husband offered me his seat, and my part, in its highly irritable and angry state, growled, “No, I want this seat to work.”	Когда несколько лет назад я путешествовала с мужем по Мексике, я остро осознала часть, которая расстраивалась, волновалась, раздражалась и даже злилась, когда жизнь шла не так, как планировалось. Первая ситуация произошла на пароме до острова Холбокс. Я выбрал для нас места, но он подозвал меня на места дальше вперед, и я пересел на его любимые места. Паром продолжал заполняться, и к тому времени, когда я убрала сумки и устроилась рядом с ним, осталось мало мест. Мое сиденье было откинуто. Я попытался поднять сиденье, но оно не сдвинулось с места. Он был сломан. Мой муж потянулся ко мне, чтобы помочь. Сиденье не двигалось. Я сидел под неудобным углом и сразу почувствовал жар, поднимающийся по моему туловищу и лицу. Я услышал голос, говорящий: «Если бы мы остались на тех местах, которые я выбрал, я бы не застрял на этом сломанном сиденье». Я осмотрел паром в поисках альтернативных мест; ни один не был доступен. Я начала ругаться себе под нос и обвинять мужа в своем дискомфорте. Я сказал ему обвинительным тоном: «Надо было остаться на других местах». Поле моего восприятия сузилось, и все, что я мог видеть, это то, что он сидел удобно, а я чувствовал себя некомфортно. Мое тело было напряженным и жестким. Рот у меня был сжат, зубы сжаты, дыхание поверхностное, внутренняя температура повысилась. Мне было жарко и физически, и эмоционально. Я извивался и вертелся, пытаясь найти удовлетворительный способ выдержать 30-минутную поездку. Муж предложил мне свое место, а моя часть в крайне раздраженном и злом состоянии прорычала: «Нет, я хочу, чтобы это сиденье работало».	When I was traveling with my husband in Mexico a few years ago, I became acutely aware of a part that got frustrated, agitated, irritable, and even angry when life didn’t go as planned. The first situation occurred on the ferry to Isla Holbox. I selected seats for us, but he beckoned me to seats further to the front and I moved to his preferred seats. The ferry continued to fill up, with few seats left by the time I put my bags away and settled in next to him. My seat was reclined. I tried to bring the seat back up, and it wouldn’t budge. It was broken. My husband reached across me to help. The seat didn’t move. I was sitting at an uncomfortable angle, and instantly I felt heat rising in my torso and face. I heard a voice say, “If we had stayed in the seats I chose, I wouldn’t be stuck in this broken seat.” I looked around the ferry for alternative seats; none were available. I started cussing under my breath and blaming my husband for my discomfort. I said to him in an accusatory tone, “We should have stayed in the other seats.” My perceptual field narrowed, and all I could see was him sitting comfortably and me uncomfortable. My body was tense and rigid. My mouth was tight with clenched teeth, my breathing was shallow, and my internal temperature rose. I was hot both physically and emotionally. I was twisting and turning, trying to find a satisfactory way to endure the 30-minute ride. My husband offered me his seat, and my part, in its highly irritable and angry state, growled, “No, I want this seat to work.”
In the depth of this experience, life outside of me seems not to exist. I am only faintly aware of what is going on around me. However, when a solution is offered, my part needs time to take it in. Slowly, it allows the alternative to creep into its awareness, then gradually becomes aware of life outside of itself.	In the depth of this experience, life outside of me seems not to exist. I am only faintly aware of what is going on around me. However, when a solution is offered, my part needs time to take it in. Slowly, it allows the alternative to creep into its awareness, then gradually becomes aware of life outside of itself.	В глубине этого опыта кажется, что жизнь вне меня не существует. Я лишь смутно осознаю, что происходит вокруг меня. Однако, когда решение предлагается, моей части нужно время, чтобы принять его. Постепенно она позволяет альтернативе проникнуть в ее сознание, а затем постепенно начинает осознавать жизнь вне себя.	In the depth of this experience, life outside of me seems not to exist. I am only faintly aware of what is going on around me. However, when a solution is offered, my part needs time to take it in. Slowly, it allows the alternative to creep into its awareness, then gradually becomes aware of life outside of itself.
After 10 minutes of what felt like misery to this part, it requested to change seats with my husband. After another few minutes, I thought, “What just happened? Why did I get so frustrated and angry about being unable to sit upright for 30 minutes? Why didn’t I just recline and enjoy the ride? Or accept my husband’s initial offer to change seats?” My behavior was baffling to me. The me that didn’t understand was another part confused by what it viewed as an overreaction to the situation.	After 10 minutes of what felt like misery to this part, it requested to change seats with my husband. After another few minutes, I thought, “What just happened? Why did I get so frustrated and angry about being unable to sit upright for 30 minutes? Why didn’t I just recline and enjoy the ride? Or accept my husband’s initial offer to change seats?” My behavior was baffling to me. The me that didn’t understand was another part confused by what it viewed as an overreaction to the situation.	После 10 минут того, что казалось страданием для этой части, она попросила меня с мужем поменяться местами. Еще через несколько минут я подумал: «Что только что произошло? Почему я так расстроился и разозлился из-за того, что не мог сидеть прямо в течение 30 минут? Почему я просто не откинулся и не наслаждался поездкой? Или принять первоначальное предложение мужа пересесть?» Мое поведение меня сбивало с толку. «Я», которое не понимало, было еще одной частью, сбитой с толку тем, что оно считало чрезмерной реакцией на ситуацию.	After 10 minutes of what felt like misery to this part, it requested to change seats with my husband. After another few minutes, I thought, “What just happened? Why did I get so frustrated and angry about being unable to sit upright for 30 minutes? Why didn’t I just recline and enjoy the ride? Or accept my husband’s initial offer to change seats?” My behavior was baffling to me. The me that didn’t understand was another part confused by what it viewed as an overreaction to the situation.
On the same trip, we planned a day of sunning and relaxing at one of our favorite beach clubs. I’d packed our beach bags with sunblock, water, my iPad for reading, a hat, sunglasses, towels—I was ready. The club prepared a delicious ceviche I was looking forward to enjoying. About an hour into our beach time, the part of me that became irritable with the unexpected showed itself again when we got caught in a rainfall that hadn’t been in the forecast. Again, I became razor focused, this time about how our day was ruined by the rain. However, this time, unlike with the broken seat, there was a degree of separation from the part, because I was aware while I was in a place of high agitation and anger, life around me continued. People played in the ocean, others sat in beach chairs drinking drinks garnished with colorful umbrellas, and children laughed and ran through the rain. Most of the people around me seemed unfazed by what my part experienced as a joy-stealing event.	On the same trip, we planned a day of sunning and relaxing at one of our favorite beach clubs. I’d packed our beach bags with sunblock, water, my iPad for reading, a hat, sunglasses, towels—I was ready. The club prepared a delicious ceviche I was looking forward to enjoying. About an hour into our beach time, the part of me that became irritable with the unexpected showed itself again when we got caught in a rainfall that hadn’t been in the forecast. Again, I became razor focused, this time about how our day was ruined by the rain. However, this time, unlike with the broken seat, there was a degree of separation from the part, because I was aware while I was in a place of high agitation and anger, life around me continued. People played in the ocean, others sat in beach chairs drinking drinks garnished with colorful umbrellas, and children laughed and ran through the rain. Most of the people around me seemed unfazed by what my part experienced as a joy-stealing event.	В той же поездке мы запланировали день, чтобы позагорать и расслабиться в одном из наших любимых пляжных клубов. Я упаковала в наши пляжные сумки солнцезащитный крем, воду, iPad для чтения, шляпу, солнцезащитные очки, полотенца — я была готова. Клуб приготовил восхитительное севиче, которое я с нетерпением ждал. Примерно через час после начала пляжного отдыха та часть меня, которая раздражалась из-за неожиданностей, снова проявила себя, когда мы попали под дождь, которого не было в прогнозе. И снова я сосредоточился, на этот раз на том, как наш день был испорчен дождем. Однако на этот раз, в отличие от сломанного сиденья, произошла определенная степень отделения от части, потому что я осознавал, что пока я находился в состоянии сильного волнения и гнева, жизнь вокруг меня продолжалась. Люди играли в океане, другие сидели в шезлонгах и пили напитки, украшенные разноцветными зонтиками, а дети смеялись и бегали под дождем. Большую часть людей вокруг меня, похоже, не смутило то, что моя часть восприняла как событие, похищающее радость.	On the same trip, we planned a day of sunning and relaxing at one of our favorite beach clubs. I’d packed our beach bags with sunblock, water, my iPad for reading, a hat, sunglasses, towels—I was ready. The club prepared a delicious ceviche I was looking forward to enjoying. About an hour into our beach time, the part of me that became irritable with the unexpected showed itself again when we got caught in a rainfall that hadn’t been in the forecast. Again, I became razor focused, this time about how our day was ruined by the rain. However, this time, unlike with the broken seat, there was a degree of separation from the part, because I was aware while I was in a place of high agitation and anger, life around me continued. People played in the ocean, others sat in beach chairs drinking drinks garnished with colorful umbrellas, and children laughed and ran through the rain. Most of the people around me seemed unfazed by what my part experienced as a joy-stealing event.
The agitation over the ferry seat and the rain caused me to get curious about this part of myself. I wanted to know its story. I realized it was protecting me from something, and I wanted to know the true catalyst for its disproportional reaction to the smallest of unexpected events. By befriending this part and being curious about its story, I learned that it was tired of the automatic response it could not control. It didn’t want to overreact, but agitation and anger felt like the only responses available. Although this part didn’t know what else to do, it felt terribly exhausted.	The agitation over the ferry seat and the rain caused me to get curious about this part of myself. I wanted to know its story. I realized it was protecting me from something, and I wanted to know the true catalyst for its disproportional reaction to the smallest of unexpected events. By befriending this part and being curious about its story, I learned that it was tired of the automatic response it could not control. It didn’t want to overreact, but agitation and anger felt like the only responses available. Although this part didn’t know what else to do, it felt terribly exhausted.	Волнение из-за сиденья на пароме и дождя заставили меня заинтересоваться этой частью меня самого. Я хотел узнать его историю. Я понял, что он защищает меня от чего-то, и мне хотелось узнать истинный катализатор его непропорциональной реакции на малейшие неожиданные события. Подружившись с этой частью и заинтересовавшись ее историей, я узнал, что она устала от автоматической реакции, которую не могла контролировать. Он не хотел слишком остро реагировать, но волнение и гнев казались единственными доступными ответами. Хотя эта часть не знала, что еще делать, она чувствовала себя ужасно утомленной.	The agitation over the ferry seat and the rain caused me to get curious about this part of myself. I wanted to know its story. I realized it was protecting me from something, and I wanted to know the true catalyst for its disproportional reaction to the smallest of unexpected events. By befriending this part and being curious about its story, I learned that it was tired of the automatic response it could not control. It didn’t want to overreact, but agitation and anger felt like the only responses available. Although this part didn’t know what else to do, it felt terribly exhausted.
IFS CONCEPT: HOPE MERCHANT	IFS CONCEPT: HOPE MERCHANT	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS: НАДЕЖДА ТОРГОВЦА	IFS CONCEPT: HOPE MERCHANT
Parts become exhausted by the extreme roles they’ve been forced into. Protectors are highly committed to their jobs, even risking complete exhaustion in protecting the system from the intense emotions of exiles and other parts. In order to support our hard-working protectors, we want to validate their experiences, appreciate how hard they work to keep us safe, and offer opportunity to rest and possibly give up their roles. Self, as what we call the Hope Merchant in IFS, is not offering blind hope to parts. The offering is specific to what parts need to willingly relinquish their role. We can support our exhausted parts and offer them hope that things can improve.	Parts become exhausted by the extreme roles they’ve been forced into. Protectors are highly committed to their jobs, even risking complete exhaustion in protecting the system from the intense emotions of exiles and other parts. In order to support our hard-working protectors, we want to validate their experiences, appreciate how hard they work to keep us safe, and offer opportunity to rest and possibly give up their roles. Self, as what we call the Hope Merchant in IFS, is not offering blind hope to parts. The offering is specific to what parts need to willingly relinquish their role. We can support our exhausted parts and offer them hope that things can improve.	Части утомляются экстремальными ролями, которые им навязали. Защитники очень преданы своей работе, даже рискуя полностью истощиться, защищая систему от сильных эмоций изгнанников и других частей. Чтобы поддержать наших трудолюбивых защитников, мы хотим подтвердить их опыт, оценить, как усердно они работают, чтобы обеспечить нашу безопасность, и предложить возможность отдохнуть и, возможно, отказаться от своих ролей. «Я», как то, что мы называем «Торговец надеждой» в IFS, не предлагает слепую надежду частям. Предложение специально предназначено для тех частей, которые должны добровольно отказаться от своей роли. Мы можем поддержать наши измученные части и дать им надежду на улучшение ситуации.	Parts become exhausted by the extreme roles they’ve been forced into. Protectors are highly committed to their jobs, even risking complete exhaustion in protecting the system from the intense emotions of exiles and other parts. In order to support our hard-working protectors, we want to validate their experiences, appreciate how hard they work to keep us safe, and offer opportunity to rest and possibly give up their roles. Self, as what we call the Hope Merchant in IFS, is not offering blind hope to parts. The offering is specific to what parts need to willingly relinquish their role. We can support our exhausted parts and offer them hope that things can improve.
In Chapter 2, we met two types of protectors: proactive protectors (managers) that carry the burden of responsibility and protect through control, and reactive protectors (firefighters) that have the burden of impulsivity and protect by releasing emotional pressure. Both proactive and reactive parts do what they do, believe what they believe, and employ the strategies they do because they don’t know any other way. They hold that what they are doing really does keep us safe. Our parts are stuck in a rut of keeping us busy and controlled so we don’t experience emotional pain and emptiness, or swiftly taking us out of the pain when it emerges. But protectors aren’t good at their jobs. We still endure situations and people in life that activate those unhealed places within. Then why do they do it? Why do they rely on the same tactics over and over?	In Chapter 2, we met two types of protectors: proactive protectors (managers) that carry the burden of responsibility and protect through control, and reactive protectors (firefighters) that have the burden of impulsivity and protect by releasing emotional pressure. Both proactive and reactive parts do what they do, believe what they believe, and employ the strategies they do because they don’t know any other way. They hold that what they are doing really does keep us safe. Our parts are stuck in a rut of keeping us busy and controlled so we don’t experience emotional pain and emptiness, or swiftly taking us out of the pain when it emerges. But protectors aren’t good at their jobs. We still endure situations and people in life that activate those unhealed places within. Then why do they do it? Why do they rely on the same tactics over and over?	В главе 2 мы познакомились с двумя типами защитников: проактивными защитниками (менеджерами), которые несут бремя ответственности и защищают посредством контроля, и реактивными защитниками (пожарными), которые несут бремя импульсивности и защищают, снимая эмоциональное давление. И проактивная, и реактивная части делают то, что делают, верят в то, во что верят, и применяют стратегии, которые используют, потому что не знают другого пути. Они считают, что то, что они делают, действительно обеспечивает нашу безопасность. Наши части застряли в рутине, заставляя нас быть занятыми и контролировать себя, чтобы мы не испытывали эмоциональную боль и пустоту или быстро избавлялись от боли, когда она появляется. Но защитники не очень хороши в своей работе. Мы все еще терпим ситуации и людей в жизни, которые активизируют эти неизлечимые места внутри. Тогда почему они это делают? Почему они снова и снова полагаются на одну и ту же тактику?	In Chapter 2, we met two types of protectors: proactive protectors (managers) that carry the burden of responsibility and protect through control, and reactive protectors (firefighters) that have the burden of impulsivity and protect by releasing emotional pressure. Both proactive and reactive parts do what they do, believe what they believe, and employ the strategies they do because they don’t know any other way. They hold that what they are doing really does keep us safe. Our parts are stuck in a rut of keeping us busy and controlled so we don’t experience emotional pain and emptiness, or swiftly taking us out of the pain when it emerges. But protectors aren’t good at their jobs. We still endure situations and people in life that activate those unhealed places within. Then why do they do it? Why do they rely on the same tactics over and over?
They do so for three main reasons. First, they aren’t aware of any other choice. At some point in their past the strategies they employ made sense, offered relief, and in some ways kept us safe. However, over years and years of use, the tactics have lost whatever effectiveness and usefulness they once possessed. Second, protective parts believe something bad will happen if they stop protecting us. They are the barrier between us and hurt, pain, and even death. From their perspective, not protecting us in the manner they do is not an option. They have sworn to protect us at all costs, and they take their job very seriously. They can’t quit. If they do, they fear what will happen to the one they protect. Even when they become weary and ineffective, they won’t stop, because every time their strategies offer even a small amount of protection from pain, they are motivated to stay the course. The third and final reason our parts continue to do what doesn’t work is that they have no awareness of Self, no relationship with Self, or no trust in Self. Remember, these parts took on their job responsibilities in most cases when we were very young. They may have felt alone and had to figure things out for themselves. With this mindset, they came up with the best solution they could at the time. They did so then and continue to do so now without connection with Self. If parts knew they no longer had to carry the burden of being responsible for our safety—if they knew there’s a resource within that can help—most would gladly consider, if not readily accept, the assistance. That said, parts may have learned through their lived experience not to trust Self. Expressing qualities of Self such as confidence, courage, and/or curiosity could have resulted in belittling, humiliation, abuse, or neglect. Since Self-energy was countered with harshness, parts believe Self is unsafe and not trustworthy.	They do so for three main reasons. First, they aren’t aware of any other choice. At some point in their past the strategies they employ made sense, offered relief, and in some ways kept us safe. However, over years and years of use, the tactics have lost whatever effectiveness and usefulness they once possessed. Second, protective parts believe something bad will happen if they stop protecting us. They are the barrier between us and hurt, pain, and even death. From their perspective, not protecting us in the manner they do is not an option. They have sworn to protect us at all costs, and they take their job very seriously. They can’t quit. If they do, they fear what will happen to the one they protect. Even when they become weary and ineffective, they won’t stop, because every time their strategies offer even a small amount of protection from pain, they are motivated to stay the course. The third and final reason our parts continue to do what doesn’t work is that they have no awareness of Self, no relationship with Self, or no trust in Self. Remember, these parts took on their job responsibilities in most cases when we were very young. They may have felt alone and had to figure things out for themselves. With this mindset, they came up with the best solution they could at the time. They did so then and continue to do so now without connection with Self. If parts knew they no longer had to carry the burden of being responsible for our safety—if they knew there’s a resource within that can help—most would gladly consider, if not readily accept, the assistance. That said, parts may have learned through their lived experience not to trust Self. Expressing qualities of Self such as confidence, courage, and/or curiosity could have resulted in belittling, humiliation, abuse, or neglect. Since Self-energy was countered with harshness, parts believe Self is unsafe and not trustworthy.	Они делают это по трем основным причинам. Во-первых, они не знают другого выбора. В какой-то момент в прошлом стратегии, которые они использовали, имели смысл, приносили облегчение и в некотором смысле защищали нас. Однако с годами использования эта тактика утратила всю эффективность и полезность, которыми она когда-то обладала. Во-вторых, защитные части считают, что если они перестанут нас защищать, произойдет что-то плохое. Они — барьер между нами и болью, болью и даже смертью. С их точки зрения, не защищать нас так, как они, — это не вариант. Они поклялись защищать нас любой ценой и очень серьезно относятся к своей работе. Они не могут уйти. Если они это сделают, они боятся того, что случится с тем, кого они защищают. Даже когда они устанут и станут неэффективными, они не остановятся, потому что каждый раз, когда их стратегии предлагают хотя бы небольшую защиту от боли, у них появляется мотивация придерживаться выбранного курса. Третья и последняя причина, по которой наши части продолжают делать то, что не работает, заключается в том, что они не осознают «Я», не имеют отношений с «Я» или не доверяют «Я». Помните, эти части брали на себя свои должностные обязанности в большинстве случаев, когда мы были очень молоды. Возможно, они чувствовали себя одинокими и должны были во всем разбираться сами. С таким мышлением они нашли лучшее решение, которое могли на тот момент. Они делали это тогда и продолжают делать это сейчас, без связи с Я. Если бы части знали, что им больше не придется нести бремя ответственности за нашу безопасность, если бы они знали, что внутри есть ресурс, который может помочь, большинство из них с радостью рассмотрит, если не с готовностью примет, помощь. Тем не менее, части, возможно, на своем жизненном опыте научились не доверять Себе. Выражение таких качеств личности, как уверенность, смелость и/или любопытство, могло привести к унижению, оскорблению, оскорблению или пренебрежению. Поскольку энергии Самости было противопоставлено резкость, части считают, что Самость небезопасна и не заслуживает доверия.	They do so for three main reasons. First, they aren’t aware of any other choice. At some point in their past the strategies they employ made sense, offered relief, and in some ways kept us safe. However, over years and years of use, the tactics have lost whatever effectiveness and usefulness they once possessed. Second, protective parts believe something bad will happen if they stop protecting us. They are the barrier between us and hurt, pain, and even death. From their perspective, not protecting us in the manner they do is not an option. They have sworn to protect us at all costs, and they take their job very seriously. They can’t quit. If they do, they fear what will happen to the one they protect. Even when they become weary and ineffective, they won’t stop, because every time their strategies offer even a small amount of protection from pain, they are motivated to stay the course. The third and final reason our parts continue to do what doesn’t work is that they have no awareness of Self, no relationship with Self, or no trust in Self. Remember, these parts took on their job responsibilities in most cases when we were very young. They may have felt alone and had to figure things out for themselves. With this mindset, they came up with the best solution they could at the time. They did so then and continue to do so now without connection with Self. If parts knew they no longer had to carry the burden of being responsible for our safety—if they knew there’s a resource within that can help—most would gladly consider, if not readily accept, the assistance. That said, parts may have learned through their lived experience not to trust Self. Expressing qualities of Self such as confidence, courage, and/or curiosity could have resulted in belittling, humiliation, abuse, or neglect. Since Self-energy was countered with harshness, parts believe Self is unsafe and not trustworthy.
The antidote to the exhaustion parts feel is hope of improvement. Hope opens them to the possibility of another way of being. The way to offer them hope is through a series of questions, or Hope Merchant steps, which I’ll share here as outlined by IFS senior lead trainer Pamela Krause.1	The antidote to the exhaustion parts feel is hope of improvement. Hope opens them to the possibility of another way of being. The way to offer them hope is through a series of questions, or Hope Merchant steps, which I’ll share here as outlined by IFS senior lead trainer Pamela Krause.1	Противоядием от чувства усталости является надежда на улучшение. Надежда открывает им возможность другого образа жизни. Чтобы дать им надежду, нужно задать им ряд вопросов или шагов «Торговца надеждой», которыми я поделюсь здесь, как описано старшим ведущим тренером IFS Памелой Краузе.1	The antidote to the exhaustion parts feel is hope of improvement. Hope opens them to the possibility of another way of being. The way to offer them hope is through a series of questions, or Hope Merchant steps, which I’ll share here as outlined by IFS senior lead trainer Pamela Krause.1
The job of these tired parts is to ensure that we are never hurt the way we were when they took on their roles. To help them, we must first know what their greatest fear is, then address it. Therefore, after the part is in relationship with Self through befriending and getting to know the part’s story, we can ask the part, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t (fill in what the part does to protect)?” The answer points to fear of the exiled part being hurt or feeling the pain of being unlovable, worthless, or not good enough and/or overwhelming the system with its intense emotions. If the first answer given does not reflect the exile’s pain, ask the protector what it is afraid would happen if (the answer they gave) happens. For example, if the protector initially answered, “There would be no one to protect the young one.” Then ask, “What are you afraid would happen if there was no one to protect the young one?” Continue this line of questioning until you get an answer that reflects the exiled part’s pain like, “I’m afraid the young one will feel ashamed and disgusting.” Once we know the fear that motivates the protector to push through exhaustion, we offer to address it: “What if I could go to the one who feels ashamed and disgusting and heal it so you wouldn’t have to feel so exhausted? Would you be interested?”	The job of these tired parts is to ensure that we are never hurt the way we were when they took on their roles. To help them, we must first know what their greatest fear is, then address it. Therefore, after the part is in relationship with Self through befriending and getting to know the part’s story, we can ask the part, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t (fill in what the part does to protect)?” The answer points to fear of the exiled part being hurt or feeling the pain of being unlovable, worthless, or not good enough and/or overwhelming the system with its intense emotions. If the first answer given does not reflect the exile’s pain, ask the protector what it is afraid would happen if (the answer they gave) happens. For example, if the protector initially answered, “There would be no one to protect the young one.” Then ask, “What are you afraid would happen if there was no one to protect the young one?” Continue this line of questioning until you get an answer that reflects the exiled part’s pain like, “I’m afraid the young one will feel ashamed and disgusting.” Once we know the fear that motivates the protector to push through exhaustion, we offer to address it: “What if I could go to the one who feels ashamed and disgusting and heal it so you wouldn’t have to feel so exhausted? Would you be interested?”	Задача этих уставших частей — гарантировать, что нам никогда не будет так больно, как когда они взяли на себя свою роль. Чтобы помочь им, мы должны сначала узнать, чего они больше всего боятся, а затем заняться этим. Следовательно, после того, как часть вошла в отношения с «Я», подружившись и узнав историю части, мы можем спросить часть: «Чего вы боитесь, что произойдет, если вы этого не сделаете (впишите, что делает часть, чтобы защитить)?» Ответ указывает на страх перед тем, что изгнанная часть пострадает, или на чувство боли от того, что она непривлекательна, бесполезна или недостаточно хороша, и/или переполняет систему своими сильными эмоциями. Если первый ответ не отражает боль изгнанника, спросите защитника, чего он боится, если (ответ, который он дал), произойдет. Например, если защитник изначально ответил: «Некому будет защитить молодого». Затем спросите: «Чего вы боитесь, если бы некому было защитить детеныша?» Продолжайте эту линию вопросов, пока не получите ответ, отражающий боль изгнанной части, например: «Боюсь, молодому будет стыдно и противно». Как только мы узнаем страх, который побуждает защитника преодолевать истощение, мы предлагаем разобраться с ним: «Что, если бы я мог пойти к тому, кто чувствует стыд и отвращение, и исцелить его, чтобы вам не пришлось чувствовать себя таким изнуренным? Вам будет интересно?»	The job of these tired parts is to ensure that we are never hurt the way we were when they took on their roles. To help them, we must first know what their greatest fear is, then address it. Therefore, after the part is in relationship with Self through befriending and getting to know the part’s story, we can ask the part, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t (fill in what the part does to protect)?” The answer points to fear of the exiled part being hurt or feeling the pain of being unlovable, worthless, or not good enough and/or overwhelming the system with its intense emotions. If the first answer given does not reflect the exile’s pain, ask the protector what it is afraid would happen if (the answer they gave) happens. For example, if the protector initially answered, “There would be no one to protect the young one.” Then ask, “What are you afraid would happen if there was no one to protect the young one?” Continue this line of questioning until you get an answer that reflects the exiled part’s pain like, “I’m afraid the young one will feel ashamed and disgusting.” Once we know the fear that motivates the protector to push through exhaustion, we offer to address it: “What if I could go to the one who feels ashamed and disgusting and heal it so you wouldn’t have to feel so exhausted? Would you be interested?”
The most important point when asking the Hope Merchant questions is using the part’s exact words. This deepens connection and trust. The part feels heard. Since the goal is to offer hope for the part’s specific concerns, precise wording matters. Besides, if different words are used that miss the intended meaning, this may upset the part and cause it to feel misunderstood, and we may miss the opportunity to instill the hope that the part’s situation can improve.	The most important point when asking the Hope Merchant questions is using the part’s exact words. This deepens connection and trust. The part feels heard. Since the goal is to offer hope for the part’s specific concerns, precise wording matters. Besides, if different words are used that miss the intended meaning, this may upset the part and cause it to feel misunderstood, and we may miss the opportunity to instill the hope that the part’s situation can improve.	Самый важный момент при задании вопросов Торговцу Надежды — это использовать точные слова детали. Это углубляет связь и доверие. Эта часть кажется услышанной. Поскольку цель состоит в том, чтобы дать надежду на решение конкретных проблем этой части, точная формулировка имеет значение. Кроме того, если используются разные слова, которые не соответствуют предполагаемому значению, это может расстроить часть и вызвать у нее ощущение неправильного понимания, и мы можем упустить возможность вселить надежду на то, что ситуация с частью может улучшиться.	The most important point when asking the Hope Merchant questions is using the part’s exact words. This deepens connection and trust. The part feels heard. Since the goal is to offer hope for the part’s specific concerns, precise wording matters. Besides, if different words are used that miss the intended meaning, this may upset the part and cause it to feel misunderstood, and we may miss the opportunity to instill the hope that the part’s situation can improve.
Pricklee	Pricklee	Прикли	Pricklee
At the start of this chapter, I described an experience with one of my parts who becomes irritable, upset, and angry when life doesn’t go as it expected. Now I want to share with you what I learned when I got curious about why I responded as I did to the broken seat and the unanticipated rain shower. I have discovered in my personal work and my work with clients that the Self qualities of curiosity and compassion are effective ways to come into relationship with our parts. The very act of being curious allows for some separation between Self and the part. It is only with this separation that we can begin to connect with the part. If you remember my responses and actions on the ferry, I was blended with the part who was irritated; that part was in the driver’s seat. If a part is in the seat of consciousness, we cannot be with it. I often say, “I can’t be with a part when I’m being the part.” My awareness of being blended came when another part questioned why I behaved the way I did. This part had a critical tone and didn’t like the part who was irritable. The curiosity of Self came forth, and I asked the part who expressed dislike for the first part to step back and allow me to be with the part that felt irritable and angry. That part stepped back. I closed my eyes to see what I noticed inside. I felt tightness and heat in my jaw and a feeling of exasperation. The feelings were at a level that allowed separation. Self let the part know that it was curious about the part’s experiences and wanted to get to know it. Self sent the energy of curiosity to the tightness in my jaw and sat with the experience. The clenching loosened. Self thanked the part for releasing some of the tension. The feeling of exasperation decreased a bit too.	At the start of this chapter, I described an experience with one of my parts who becomes irritable, upset, and angry when life doesn’t go as it expected. Now I want to share with you what I learned when I got curious about why I responded as I did to the broken seat and the unanticipated rain shower. I have discovered in my personal work and my work with clients that the Self qualities of curiosity and compassion are effective ways to come into relationship with our parts. The very act of being curious allows for some separation between Self and the part. It is only with this separation that we can begin to connect with the part. If you remember my responses and actions on the ferry, I was blended with the part who was irritated; that part was in the driver’s seat. If a part is in the seat of consciousness, we cannot be with it. I often say, “I can’t be with a part when I’m being the part.” My awareness of being blended came when another part questioned why I behaved the way I did. This part had a critical tone and didn’t like the part who was irritable. The curiosity of Self came forth, and I asked the part who expressed dislike for the first part to step back and allow me to be with the part that felt irritable and angry. That part stepped back. I closed my eyes to see what I noticed inside. I felt tightness and heat in my jaw and a feeling of exasperation. The feelings were at a level that allowed separation. Self let the part know that it was curious about the part’s experiences and wanted to get to know it. Self sent the energy of curiosity to the tightness in my jaw and sat with the experience. The clenching loosened. Self thanked the part for releasing some of the tension. The feeling of exasperation decreased a bit too.	В начале этой главы я описал случай с одной из моих частей, которая становится раздражительной, расстроенной и злой, когда жизнь идет не так, как ожидалось. Теперь я хочу поделиться с вами тем, что я узнал, когда мне стало интересно, почему я так отреагировал на сломанное сиденье и неожиданный ливень. В своей личной работе и работе с клиентами я обнаружил, что качества Самости, такие как любопытство и сострадание, являются эффективными способами войти в отношения со своими частями. Сам акт любопытства позволяет провести некоторое разделение между «Я» и частью. Только после этого разделения мы можем начать соединяться с частью. Если вы помните мои реакции и действия на пароме, я смешался с той частью, которая была раздражена; эта часть находилась на водительском сиденье. Если часть находится в месте сознания, мы не можем быть с ней. Я часто говорю: «Я не могу быть с ролью, когда я исполняю роль». Мое осознание того, что я смешался, пришло, когда другая часть задалась вопросом, почему я веду себя таким образом. Эта часть имела критический тон и не любила раздражительную часть. Проявилось любопытство Самости, и я попросил ту часть, которая выражала неприязнь к первой части, отступить и позволить мне быть с той частью, которая чувствовала себя раздражённой и злой. Эта часть отступила. Я закрыл глаза, чтобы увидеть то, что заметил внутри. Я почувствовал напряжение и жар в челюсти и чувство раздражения. Чувства были на уровне, допускавшем разлуку. Я дал части понять, что ей интересно узнать об опыте части и что она хочет с ней познакомиться. Селф направил энергию любопытства на мои стиснутые челюсти и остался сидеть, переживая этот опыт. Сжатие ослабло. Селф поблагодарил часть за то, что она сняла часть напряжения. Чувство раздражения тоже немного уменьшилось.	At the start of this chapter, I described an experience with one of my parts who becomes irritable, upset, and angry when life doesn’t go as it expected. Now I want to share with you what I learned when I got curious about why I responded as I did to the broken seat and the unanticipated rain shower. I have discovered in my personal work and my work with clients that the Self qualities of curiosity and compassion are effective ways to come into relationship with our parts. The very act of being curious allows for some separation between Self and the part. It is only with this separation that we can begin to connect with the part. If you remember my responses and actions on the ferry, I was blended with the part who was irritated; that part was in the driver’s seat. If a part is in the seat of consciousness, we cannot be with it. I often say, “I can’t be with a part when I’m being the part.” My awareness of being blended came when another part questioned why I behaved the way I did. This part had a critical tone and didn’t like the part who was irritable. The curiosity of Self came forth, and I asked the part who expressed dislike for the first part to step back and allow me to be with the part that felt irritable and angry. That part stepped back. I closed my eyes to see what I noticed inside. I felt tightness and heat in my jaw and a feeling of exasperation. The feelings were at a level that allowed separation. Self let the part know that it was curious about the part’s experiences and wanted to get to know it. Self sent the energy of curiosity to the tightness in my jaw and sat with the experience. The clenching loosened. Self thanked the part for releasing some of the tension. The feeling of exasperation decreased a bit too.
At that point, curiosity increases. Self sends the part the energy of curiosity. Self wants to know and understand the experiences of this part and wants it to feel Self’s desire to get to know it better. Self asks, “What do you want me to know about you?” The part quickly responds, “My name is Prickly, spelled P-R-I-C-K-L-E-E, never L-Y.” The way she emphasizes never gives Self the sense that the distinction is very important. “Got it, Pricklee, L-E-E. What about life not going as you expect causes you to feel irritable?”	At that point, curiosity increases. Self sends the part the energy of curiosity. Self wants to know and understand the experiences of this part and wants it to feel Self’s desire to get to know it better. Self asks, “What do you want me to know about you?” The part quickly responds, “My name is Prickly, spelled P-R-I-C-K-L-E-E, never L-Y.” The way she emphasizes never gives Self the sense that the distinction is very important. “Got it, Pricklee, L-E-E. What about life not going as you expect causes you to feel irritable?”	В этот момент любопытство возрастает. «Я» посылает части энергию любопытства. «Я» хочет знать и понимать переживания этой части и хочет, чтобы она почувствовала желание «Я» узнать ее лучше. Селф спрашивает: «Что ты хочешь, чтобы я знал о тебе?» Часть быстро отвечает: «Меня зовут Колючий, пишется П-Р-И-К-Л-Е-Е, а не Л-Й». То, как она подчеркивает, никогда не дает Селбу ощущения, что это различие очень важно. — Понял, Прикли, Л-И-Е. А как насчет того, что жизнь идет не так, как вы ожидаете, и это заставляет вас чувствовать себя раздражительным?»	At that point, curiosity increases. Self sends the part the energy of curiosity. Self wants to know and understand the experiences of this part and wants it to feel Self’s desire to get to know it better. Self asks, “What do you want me to know about you?” The part quickly responds, “My name is Prickly, spelled P-R-I-C-K-L-E-E, never L-Y.” The way she emphasizes never gives Self the sense that the distinction is very important. “Got it, Pricklee, L-E-E. What about life not going as you expect causes you to feel irritable?”
She responds, “I like to know how things are going to turn out. I don’t like it when the unpredictable happens. I want to be prepared for bad things.” Self is now curious about the connection between the unexpected and bad things happening. Self says, “It makes sense to want to be prepared in case something bad happens. Have unexpected bad things happened to you?” Pricklee emphatically says, “Yes, they have.” “I’m interested to know more about that,” Self says in an inquiring tone. Pricklee totally relaxes her (my) jaw as she projects her experiences as a movie playing before my eyes.	She responds, “I like to know how things are going to turn out. I don’t like it when the unpredictable happens. I want to be prepared for bad things.” Self is now curious about the connection between the unexpected and bad things happening. Self says, “It makes sense to want to be prepared in case something bad happens. Have unexpected bad things happened to you?” Pricklee emphatically says, “Yes, they have.” “I’m interested to know more about that,” Self says in an inquiring tone. Pricklee totally relaxes her (my) jaw as she projects her experiences as a movie playing before my eyes.	Она отвечает: «Мне нравится знать, как все обернется. Я не люблю, когда случается непредсказуемое. Я хочу быть готовым к плохим вещам». Селфу теперь интересно узнать о связи между происходящими неожиданными и плохими событиями. Селф говорит: «Имеет смысл быть готовым на случай, если произойдет что-то плохое. С тобой случались неожиданные плохие вещи?» Прикли решительно говорит: «Да, они это сделали». «Мне интересно узнать об этом больше», — говорит Селф вопросительным тоном. Прикли полностью расслабляет свою (мою) челюсть, проецируя свои переживания как фильм, который идет у меня на глазах.	She responds, “I like to know how things are going to turn out. I don’t like it when the unpredictable happens. I want to be prepared for bad things.” Self is now curious about the connection between the unexpected and bad things happening. Self says, “It makes sense to want to be prepared in case something bad happens. Have unexpected bad things happened to you?” Pricklee emphatically says, “Yes, they have.” “I’m interested to know more about that,” Self says in an inquiring tone. Pricklee totally relaxes her (my) jaw as she projects her experiences as a movie playing before my eyes.
The first scene is of me at about age nine traveling on a plane with my younger sister and brother to visit our paternal grandparents in Louisiana for the summer. I see a stewardess attending to us with food and beverages. I feel the excitement and fear in my physical body that my younger self felt during the flight. I see myself coloring happily in a book about planes and travel. I’m then shown a scene of the stewardess pinning golden wings on the lapel of my blouse. I sense that my younger self felt so special.	The first scene is of me at about age nine traveling on a plane with my younger sister and brother to visit our paternal grandparents in Louisiana for the summer. I see a stewardess attending to us with food and beverages. I feel the excitement and fear in my physical body that my younger self felt during the flight. I see myself coloring happily in a book about planes and travel. I’m then shown a scene of the stewardess pinning golden wings on the lapel of my blouse. I sense that my younger self felt so special.	В первой сцене я лет девяти лет летаю на самолете с младшей сестрой и братом, чтобы навестить летом наших бабушку и дедушку по отцовской линии в Луизиане. Я вижу, как стюардесса обслуживает нас с едой и напитками. Я чувствую волнение и страх в своем физическом теле, которые чувствовала моя молодая личность во время полета. Я вижу себя счастливо раскрашивающим книгу о самолетах и ​​путешествиях. Затем мне показывают сцену, где стюардесса прикрепляет золотые крылья к лацкану моей блузки. Я чувствую, что я в молодости чувствовал себя таким особенным.	The first scene is of me at about age nine traveling on a plane with my younger sister and brother to visit our paternal grandparents in Louisiana for the summer. I see a stewardess attending to us with food and beverages. I feel the excitement and fear in my physical body that my younger self felt during the flight. I see myself coloring happily in a book about planes and travel. I’m then shown a scene of the stewardess pinning golden wings on the lapel of my blouse. I sense that my younger self felt so special.
The next scene is a montage of various activities and experiences while visiting that summer. My two youngest aunts were home from college. They were both in their early 20s at the time. I saw flashes of them taking me to the public swimming pool, to Grambling State University where they both attended college, to the local grocery store to get candy, chips, and soda. Next, I saw myself eating figs off the tree in the yard until my stomach hurt. My grandmother teaching me to sew on her black-and-gold Singer sewing machine with the large circle thing that made the needle go up and down. We were making dresses for my Barbie dolls. Pricklee even played a scene of me getting into mischief with my cousins throwing rocks at the glass-paned roof of an abandoned plant nursery. In these scenes, I felt Pricklee’s light expansiveness of joy and playfulness.	The next scene is a montage of various activities and experiences while visiting that summer. My two youngest aunts were home from college. They were both in their early 20s at the time. I saw flashes of them taking me to the public swimming pool, to Grambling State University where they both attended college, to the local grocery store to get candy, chips, and soda. Next, I saw myself eating figs off the tree in the yard until my stomach hurt. My grandmother teaching me to sew on her black-and-gold Singer sewing machine with the large circle thing that made the needle go up and down. We were making dresses for my Barbie dolls. Pricklee even played a scene of me getting into mischief with my cousins throwing rocks at the glass-paned roof of an abandoned plant nursery. In these scenes, I felt Pricklee’s light expansiveness of joy and playfulness.	Следующая сцена представляет собой монтаж различных мероприятий и впечатлений во время посещения того лета. Две мои младшие тети вернулись из колледжа. Им обоим тогда было около 20 лет. Я видела, как они везли меня в общественный бассейн, в Государственный университет Грэмблинга, где они оба учились в колледже, в местный продуктовый магазин за конфетами, чипсами и газировкой. Затем я увидел, как ем инжир с дерева во дворе, пока у меня не заболел живот. Моя бабушка учила меня шить на своей черно-золотой швейной машине Singer с большим круглым предметом, который заставлял иглу подниматься и опускаться. Мы шили платья для моих кукол Барби. Прикли даже разыграл сцену, в которой я шалил с моими кузенами, швыряющими камни в стеклянную крышу заброшенного питомника растений. В этих сценах я почувствовал легкую широту радости и игривости Прикли.	The next scene is a montage of various activities and experiences while visiting that summer. My two youngest aunts were home from college. They were both in their early 20s at the time. I saw flashes of them taking me to the public swimming pool, to Grambling State University where they both attended college, to the local grocery store to get candy, chips, and soda. Next, I saw myself eating figs off the tree in the yard until my stomach hurt. My grandmother teaching me to sew on her black-and-gold Singer sewing machine with the large circle thing that made the needle go up and down. We were making dresses for my Barbie dolls. Pricklee even played a scene of me getting into mischief with my cousins throwing rocks at the glass-paned roof of an abandoned plant nursery. In these scenes, I felt Pricklee’s light expansiveness of joy and playfulness.
The final scenes begin with my nine-year-old self going to the mailbox at the road to collect the mail, which was one of her daily chores. She recognized the bold, strong box lettering on one of the envelopes as her father’s printing. The next thing she noticed literally took her breath away. The return address was not her home address in Marina del Rey, California, but an unknown address in Inglewood, California. She was confused and didn’t understand why her father would have a new, different address. I could feel the strain of her trying to make sense of what she read. Wondering if this was the address of the apartment building he and Mom owned. But why would he put that address on the envelope? Although she didn’t understand, she felt that something was very wrong. She ran into the house with tears on her face, demanding that her grandmother tell her why her father had a new address. Her grandmother said she didn’t know, but my younger self knew she was lying. Pricklee next showed a scene of me asking my grandmother what the letter said. My grandmother refused, saying, “It’s not mine to tell.” I felt nine-year-old Tamala’s outrage at the truth being withheld and her terror of the unknown.	The final scenes begin with my nine-year-old self going to the mailbox at the road to collect the mail, which was one of her daily chores. She recognized the bold, strong box lettering on one of the envelopes as her father’s printing. The next thing she noticed literally took her breath away. The return address was not her home address in Marina del Rey, California, but an unknown address in Inglewood, California. She was confused and didn’t understand why her father would have a new, different address. I could feel the strain of her trying to make sense of what she read. Wondering if this was the address of the apartment building he and Mom owned. But why would he put that address on the envelope? Although she didn’t understand, she felt that something was very wrong. She ran into the house with tears on her face, demanding that her grandmother tell her why her father had a new address. Her grandmother said she didn’t know, but my younger self knew she was lying. Pricklee next showed a scene of me asking my grandmother what the letter said. My grandmother refused, saying, “It’s not mine to tell.” I felt nine-year-old Tamala’s outrage at the truth being withheld and her terror of the unknown.	Финальные сцены начинаются с того, что я, девятилетняя девочка, иду к почтовому ящику на дороге, чтобы забрать почту, что было одной из ее ежедневных обязанностей. Она узнала в жирных, ярких буквах на одном из конвертов печать своего отца. Следующее, что она заметила, у нее буквально перехватило дыхание. Обратным адресом был не ее домашний адрес в Марина-дель-Рей, Калифорния, а неизвестный адрес в Инглвуде, Калифорния. Она была в замешательстве и не понимала, почему у ее отца новый, другой адрес. Я чувствовал напряжение, с которым она пыталась понять смысл прочитанного. Интересно, был ли это адрес многоквартирного дома, которым владели они с мамой? Но зачем ему писать этот адрес на конверте? Хоть она и не понимала, но чувствовала, что что-то не так. Она вбежала в дом со слезами на лице, требуя от бабушки рассказать ей, почему у ее отца новый адрес. Ее бабушка сказала, что не знает, но я в молодости знал, что она лжет. Затем Прикли показал сцену, где я спрашиваю бабушку, о чем говорится в письме. Бабушка отказалась, сказав: «Не мне рассказывать». Я почувствовал возмущение девятилетней Тамалы по поводу сокрытия правды и ее ужас перед неизвестным.	The final scenes begin with my nine-year-old self going to the mailbox at the road to collect the mail, which was one of her daily chores. She recognized the bold, strong box lettering on one of the envelopes as her father’s printing. The next thing she noticed literally took her breath away. The return address was not her home address in Marina del Rey, California, but an unknown address in Inglewood, California. She was confused and didn’t understand why her father would have a new, different address. I could feel the strain of her trying to make sense of what she read. Wondering if this was the address of the apartment building he and Mom owned. But why would he put that address on the envelope? Although she didn’t understand, she felt that something was very wrong. She ran into the house with tears on her face, demanding that her grandmother tell her why her father had a new address. Her grandmother said she didn’t know, but my younger self knew she was lying. Pricklee next showed a scene of me asking my grandmother what the letter said. My grandmother refused, saying, “It’s not mine to tell.” I felt nine-year-old Tamala’s outrage at the truth being withheld and her terror of the unknown.
Gone were the carefree days of cheerfully swimming, sewing, and eating handpicked figs. She was consumed with wanting to know the contents of her father’s letter and the significance of the return address. No one would tell her what was going on back home. Everyone claimed to have no idea. She begged and cried to go home. She believed she could fix whatever was wrong if she could return. She was only told she would talk to her parents soon. When she finally spoke with her parents by phone, they just told her to enjoy her summer and they would talk about it when she got home. Which was all she wanted to do, go home. The phone call left her anxious and fearful.	Gone were the carefree days of cheerfully swimming, sewing, and eating handpicked figs. She was consumed with wanting to know the contents of her father’s letter and the significance of the return address. No one would tell her what was going on back home. Everyone claimed to have no idea. She begged and cried to go home. She believed she could fix whatever was wrong if she could return. She was only told she would talk to her parents soon. When she finally spoke with her parents by phone, they just told her to enjoy her summer and they would talk about it when she got home. Which was all she wanted to do, go home. The phone call left her anxious and fearful.	Прошли те беззаботные дни, когда мы весело купались, шили и ели собранный вручную инжир. Ее охватило желание узнать содержание письма отца и значение обратного адреса. Никто не рассказывал ей, что происходит дома. Все утверждали, что понятия не имеют. Она умоляла и плакала, чтобы она пошла домой. Она верила, что сможет исправить все, что было не так, если вернется. Ей только сказали, что она скоро поговорит с родителями. Когда она наконец поговорила с родителями по телефону, они просто сказали ей наслаждаться летом и поговорить об этом, когда она вернется домой. Единственное, чего ей хотелось, — пойти домой. Телефонный звонок вызвал у нее тревогу и страх.	Gone were the carefree days of cheerfully swimming, sewing, and eating handpicked figs. She was consumed with wanting to know the contents of her father’s letter and the significance of the return address. No one would tell her what was going on back home. Everyone claimed to have no idea. She begged and cried to go home. She believed she could fix whatever was wrong if she could return. She was only told she would talk to her parents soon. When she finally spoke with her parents by phone, they just told her to enjoy her summer and they would talk about it when she got home. Which was all she wanted to do, go home. The phone call left her anxious and fearful.
The next thing my nine-year-old self communicates comes in the feeling of having the wind knocked out of her. She felt blindsided and abandoned. There was no one to help her manage her overwhelming feelings. Her heart physically hurt, and she didn’t understand the agonizing pain. Her tears began to flow from my eyes. I felt the intensity of her suffering and desperation. She didn’t want to face what she knew. She wanted someone to tell her that her fears were not true, but their secrecy only confirmed them. She had sensed high tension between her parents before she left for Louisiana. She knew her mother was unhappy. In her mind, her parents’ fighting, not speaking to each other, her mother’s unhappiness, and her father’s new address meant her parents were getting a divorce and her father had moved out. Self continued to offer my younger self the sincerest compassion for her experience and the shock of it. Pricklee went on to share that she made a promise to never allow anything to catch her unaware again. It hurt much too much. Her life would be predictable and knowable to protect her heart from this unbearable pain.	The next thing my nine-year-old self communicates comes in the feeling of having the wind knocked out of her. She felt blindsided and abandoned. There was no one to help her manage her overwhelming feelings. Her heart physically hurt, and she didn’t understand the agonizing pain. Her tears began to flow from my eyes. I felt the intensity of her suffering and desperation. She didn’t want to face what she knew. She wanted someone to tell her that her fears were not true, but their secrecy only confirmed them. She had sensed high tension between her parents before she left for Louisiana. She knew her mother was unhappy. In her mind, her parents’ fighting, not speaking to each other, her mother’s unhappiness, and her father’s new address meant her parents were getting a divorce and her father had moved out. Self continued to offer my younger self the sincerest compassion for her experience and the shock of it. Pricklee went on to share that she made a promise to never allow anything to catch her unaware again. It hurt much too much. Her life would be predictable and knowable to protect her heart from this unbearable pain.	Следующее, что сообщает мне девятилетняя девочка, — это ощущение, что из нее выбивается ветер. Она чувствовала себя ошеломленной и брошенной. Не было никого, кто мог бы помочь ей справиться с ее переполняющими чувствами. Сердце у нее физически болело, и она не понимала мучительной боли. Ее слезы начали течь из моих глаз. Я почувствовал интенсивность ее страданий и отчаяния. Она не хотела сталкиваться с тем, что знала. Ей хотелось, чтобы кто-нибудь сказал ей, что ее опасения не соответствуют действительности, но их секретность только подтверждала их. Еще до отъезда в Луизиану она почувствовала сильное напряжение между родителями. Она знала, что ее мать несчастна. По ее мнению, ссоры ее родителей, молчание друг с другом, несчастье ее матери и новый адрес ее отца означали, что ее родители разводятся, и ее отец уезжает. Селф продолжал выражать себе в молодости самое искреннее сострадание к ее опыту и шоку, который он испытал. Далее Прикли рассказала, что дала обещание никогда больше не позволять ничему застать ее врасплох. Это было слишком больно. Ее жизнь будет предсказуемой и познаваемой, чтобы защитить ее сердце от этой невыносимой боли.	The next thing my nine-year-old self communicates comes in the feeling of having the wind knocked out of her. She felt blindsided and abandoned. There was no one to help her manage her overwhelming feelings. Her heart physically hurt, and she didn’t understand the agonizing pain. Her tears began to flow from my eyes. I felt the intensity of her suffering and desperation. She didn’t want to face what she knew. She wanted someone to tell her that her fears were not true, but their secrecy only confirmed them. She had sensed high tension between her parents before she left for Louisiana. She knew her mother was unhappy. In her mind, her parents’ fighting, not speaking to each other, her mother’s unhappiness, and her father’s new address meant her parents were getting a divorce and her father had moved out. Self continued to offer my younger self the sincerest compassion for her experience and the shock of it. Pricklee went on to share that she made a promise to never allow anything to catch her unaware again. It hurt much too much. Her life would be predictable and knowable to protect her heart from this unbearable pain.
From connecting with my parts from Self-energy, I became aware that Pricklee is the part of me who becomes irritable, and she exiled nine-year-old Tamala as a way to make life predictable and protect her from the pain of being blindsided again. Pricklee’s carefree, fun-loving nature was eclipsed by the responsibility to protect the system from experiencing the pain of abandonment and being alone with big, scary emotions.	From connecting with my parts from Self-energy, I became aware that Pricklee is the part of me who becomes irritable, and she exiled nine-year-old Tamala as a way to make life predictable and protect her from the pain of being blindsided again. Pricklee’s carefree, fun-loving nature was eclipsed by the responsibility to protect the system from experiencing the pain of abandonment and being alone with big, scary emotions.	Соединившись со своими частями Само-энергии, я осознал, что Прикли — это та часть меня, которая становится раздражительной, и она изгнала девятилетнюю Тамалу, чтобы сделать жизнь предсказуемой и защитить ее от боли, связанной с повторным ошеломлением. . Беззаботный и веселый характер Прикли затмевался обязанностью защищать систему от боли покинутости и одиночества с сильными, пугающими эмоциями.	From connecting with my parts from Self-energy, I became aware that Pricklee is the part of me who becomes irritable, and she exiled nine-year-old Tamala as a way to make life predictable and protect her from the pain of being blindsided again. Pricklee’s carefree, fun-loving nature was eclipsed by the responsibility to protect the system from experiencing the pain of abandonment and being alone with big, scary emotions.
After sharing how hard she’s been working to protect young Tamala, Pricklee expresses how exhausted she is. She admits feeling stressed out trying to control everything and predict every outcome. She is constantly on high alert, looking for what could go wrong. Pricklee is only calm when things go as planned, and any deviation from the plan causes anxiety, annoyance, or anger. Self asks her, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t control everything and predict every outcome?” She answers, “The brokenhearted pain will come and steal our joy forever, and we’ll never be carefree again.” Self feels deep compassion for the dedication of this part to protect and offers, “What if I could go to the one who feels the brokenhearted pain and heal it so you wouldn’t have to feel so exhausted. Would you be interested?” With relief and slight doubt, she asks, “You can do that?” In reassurance Self answers, “Yes, with your permission I can.”	After sharing how hard she’s been working to protect young Tamala, Pricklee expresses how exhausted she is. She admits feeling stressed out trying to control everything and predict every outcome. She is constantly on high alert, looking for what could go wrong. Pricklee is only calm when things go as planned, and any deviation from the plan causes anxiety, annoyance, or anger. Self asks her, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t control everything and predict every outcome?” She answers, “The brokenhearted pain will come and steal our joy forever, and we’ll never be carefree again.” Self feels deep compassion for the dedication of this part to protect and offers, “What if I could go to the one who feels the brokenhearted pain and heal it so you wouldn’t have to feel so exhausted. Would you be interested?” With relief and slight doubt, she asks, “You can do that?” In reassurance Self answers, “Yes, with your permission I can.”	Поделившись тем, как усердно она работала, чтобы защитить юную Тамалу, Прикли рассказала, насколько она измотана. Она признается, что испытывает стресс из-за попыток все контролировать и предугадать каждый результат. Она постоянно находится в состоянии повышенной готовности, выискивая, что может пойти не так. Прикли спокоен только тогда, когда дела идут по плану, и любое отклонение от плана вызывает тревогу, раздражение или гнев. Селф спрашивает ее: «Чего ты боишься, если бы ты не контролировала все и не предсказывала каждый результат?» Она отвечает: «Боль разбитого сердца придет и навсегда украдет нашу радость, и мы больше никогда не будем беззаботны». «Я» испытывает глубокое сострадание к преданности этой части защите и предлагает: «Что, если бы я мог пойти к тому, кто чувствует боль разбитого сердца, и исцелить ее, чтобы тебе не пришлось чувствовать себя таким изнуренным? Вам будет интересно?» С облегчением и легким сомнением она спрашивает: «Ты сможешь это сделать?» В качестве успокоения Селф отвечает: «Да, с вашего разрешения могу».	After sharing how hard she’s been working to protect young Tamala, Pricklee expresses how exhausted she is. She admits feeling stressed out trying to control everything and predict every outcome. She is constantly on high alert, looking for what could go wrong. Pricklee is only calm when things go as planned, and any deviation from the plan causes anxiety, annoyance, or anger. Self asks her, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t control everything and predict every outcome?” She answers, “The brokenhearted pain will come and steal our joy forever, and we’ll never be carefree again.” Self feels deep compassion for the dedication of this part to protect and offers, “What if I could go to the one who feels the brokenhearted pain and heal it so you wouldn’t have to feel so exhausted. Would you be interested?” With relief and slight doubt, she asks, “You can do that?” In reassurance Self answers, “Yes, with your permission I can.”
It’s not surprising that our parts are exhausted. Many have been protecting us since we were young. The irony of their tiring work is that the vulnerable parts they protect are not changed or healed by their efforts. Our young parts continue to feel and express their pain, unworthiness, and/or shame. The experiences Pricklee is trying to protect me from, joylessness and not being carefree, are exactly what she creates when things don’t go as she expects. The joy of arriving to Isla Holbox by ferry for the first time was overshadowed by Pricklee’s irritation and anger. Enjoying the beach in a rain shower was not the day Pricklee had planned, therefore her ire canceled what could have been a carefree, fun experience. Our protectors’ intention is to protect us, but their strategies fall short.	It’s not surprising that our parts are exhausted. Many have been protecting us since we were young. The irony of their tiring work is that the vulnerable parts they protect are not changed or healed by their efforts. Our young parts continue to feel and express their pain, unworthiness, and/or shame. The experiences Pricklee is trying to protect me from, joylessness and not being carefree, are exactly what she creates when things don’t go as she expects. The joy of arriving to Isla Holbox by ferry for the first time was overshadowed by Pricklee’s irritation and anger. Enjoying the beach in a rain shower was not the day Pricklee had planned, therefore her ire canceled what could have been a carefree, fun experience. Our protectors’ intention is to protect us, but their strategies fall short.	Неудивительно, что наши части исчерпаны. Многие защищали нас с тех пор, как мы были молоды. Ирония их утомительной работы заключается в том, что уязвимые части, которые они защищают, не изменяются и не исцеляются их усилиями. Наши молодые части продолжают чувствовать и выражать свою боль, никчемность и/или стыд. Переживания, от которых Прикли пытается меня защитить, безрадостность и беззаботность — это именно то, что она создает, когда дела идут не так, как она ожидает. Радость от первого прибытия на остров Холбокс на пароме была омрачена раздражением и гневом Прикли. Наслаждение пляжем под ливневым душем было не тем днем, который планировала Прикли, поэтому ее гнев свел на нет то, что могло быть беззаботным и веселым опытом. Намерение наших защитников состоит в том, чтобы защитить нас, но их стратегии терпят неудачу.	It’s not surprising that our parts are exhausted. Many have been protecting us since we were young. The irony of their tiring work is that the vulnerable parts they protect are not changed or healed by their efforts. Our young parts continue to feel and express their pain, unworthiness, and/or shame. The experiences Pricklee is trying to protect me from, joylessness and not being carefree, are exactly what she creates when things don’t go as she expects. The joy of arriving to Isla Holbox by ferry for the first time was overshadowed by Pricklee’s irritation and anger. Enjoying the beach in a rain shower was not the day Pricklee had planned, therefore her ire canceled what could have been a carefree, fun experience. Our protectors’ intention is to protect us, but their strategies fall short.
It’s important to understand that our parts are forced into extreme protective roles based on their experiences. Pricklee wasn’t born irritable and needing to protect. In her natural state, she was fun-loving, curious, expressive, and adventurous. She both absorbed the life occurring around her and became a part of it. Her firsthand experience of being left alone with her emotions and unanswered questions led her to feel unsafe and increased her need for certainty and predictability. Today, when she doesn’t get those, she escalates to irritability and anger in fear that the nine-year-old she protects will be harmed again.	It’s important to understand that our parts are forced into extreme protective roles based on their experiences. Pricklee wasn’t born irritable and needing to protect. In her natural state, she was fun-loving, curious, expressive, and adventurous. She both absorbed the life occurring around her and became a part of it. Her firsthand experience of being left alone with her emotions and unanswered questions led her to feel unsafe and increased her need for certainty and predictability. Today, when she doesn’t get those, she escalates to irritability and anger in fear that the nine-year-old she protects will be harmed again.	Важно понимать, что наши части вынуждены играть крайнюю защитную роль на основе своего опыта. Прикли не родился раздражительным и нуждающимся в защите. В своем естественном состоянии она была веселой, любопытной, выразительной и предприимчивой. Она не только впитывала происходящую вокруг жизнь, но и становилась ее частью. Ее непосредственный опыт того, что она осталась наедине со своими эмоциями и вопросами без ответов, привел к тому, что она почувствовала себя небезопасно и увеличила ее потребность в уверенности и предсказуемости. Сегодня, когда она этого не получает, ее раздражительность и гнев перерастают в страх, что девятилетнему ребенку, которого она защищает, снова причинят вред.	It’s important to understand that our parts are forced into extreme protective roles based on their experiences. Pricklee wasn’t born irritable and needing to protect. In her natural state, she was fun-loving, curious, expressive, and adventurous. She both absorbed the life occurring around her and became a part of it. Her firsthand experience of being left alone with her emotions and unanswered questions led her to feel unsafe and increased her need for certainty and predictability. Today, when she doesn’t get those, she escalates to irritability and anger in fear that the nine-year-old she protects will be harmed again.
Meditation: The Weary One	Meditation: The Weary One	Медитация: Утомленный	Meditation: The Weary One
The Weary One meditation is the fourth meditation given me by my ancestors. This meditation came at a time when many of my parts were tired and overworked. I was seeing psychotherapy clients full-time while building an IFS consultation practice for therapists and working toward becoming an IFS lead trainer. Not to mention all the other activities of life.	The Weary One meditation is the fourth meditation given me by my ancestors. This meditation came at a time when many of my parts were tired and overworked. I was seeing psychotherapy clients full-time while building an IFS consultation practice for therapists and working toward becoming an IFS lead trainer. Not to mention all the other activities of life.	Медитация «Усталый» — четвертая медитация, данная мне моими предками. Эта медитация пришла в то время, когда многие мои части тела были утомлены и перегружены работой. Я постоянно принимал клиентов-психотерапевтов, одновременно создавая консультационную практику IFS для терапевтов и работая над тем, чтобы стать ведущим тренером IFS. Не говоря уже обо всех остальных сферах жизни.	The Weary One meditation is the fourth meditation given me by my ancestors. This meditation came at a time when many of my parts were tired and overworked. I was seeing psychotherapy clients full-time while building an IFS consultation practice for therapists and working toward becoming an IFS lead trainer. Not to mention all the other activities of life.
This meditation supports parts that are exhausted in their role. It’s a chance to connect and learn the part’s story, its job, and why it’s exhausted. This meditation offers hope to a weary part that life can be different, and it doesn’t have to work so hard.	This meditation supports parts that are exhausted in their role. It’s a chance to connect and learn the part’s story, its job, and why it’s exhausted. This meditation offers hope to a weary part that life can be different, and it doesn’t have to work so hard.	Эта медитация поддерживает части, которые исчерпаны в своей роли. Это шанс пообщаться и узнать историю детали, ее работу и то, почему она исчерпана. Эта медитация дает утомленной части надежду на то, что жизнь может быть другой, и ей не придется так много работать.	This meditation supports parts that are exhausted in their role. It’s a chance to connect and learn the part’s story, its job, and why it’s exhausted. This meditation offers hope to a weary part that life can be different, and it doesn’t have to work so hard.
Relax and find a comfortable position to help your body settle.	Relax and find a comfortable position to help your body settle.	Расслабьтесь и найдите удобное положение, которое поможет вашему телу успокоиться.	Relax and find a comfortable position to help your body settle.
Close your eyes if that feels right.	Close your eyes if that feels right.	Закройте глаза, если это кажется правильным.	Close your eyes if that feels right.
As you go inside, notice your breath.	As you go inside, notice your breath.	Заходя внутрь, обратите внимание на свое дыхание.	As you go inside, notice your breath.
Is it shallow and short or deep and long?	Is it shallow and short or deep and long?	Оно мелкое и короткое или глубокое и длинное?	Is it shallow and short or deep and long?
As you notice, see if you can lengthen and deepen each breath.	As you notice, see if you can lengthen and deepen each breath.	Как заметите, проверьте, можете ли вы удлинить и углубить каждое дыхание.	As you notice, see if you can lengthen and deepen each breath.
Find a part that is weary, exhausted, or tired.	Find a part that is weary, exhausted, or tired.	Найдите часть, которая утомлена, измотана или устала.	Find a part that is weary, exhausted, or tired.
Notice where this part shows up in or near your body.	Notice where this part shows up in or near your body.	Обратите внимание, где эта часть появляется внутри или рядом с вашим телом.	Notice where this part shows up in or near your body.
Focus on how tired this part is.	Focus on how tired this part is.	Сосредоточьтесь на том, насколько устала эта часть.	Focus on how tired this part is.
As you focus, what do you notice?	As you focus, what do you notice?	Что вы замечаете, когда фокусируетесь?	As you focus, what do you notice?
Choose a place to go with the part to relax and learn more.	Choose a place to go with the part to relax and learn more.	Выберите место, куда пойдете с частью, чтобы расслабиться и узнать больше.	Choose a place to go with the part to relax and learn more.
This could be a place in nature, you could cuddle near a fire, or take a relaxing walk; you can go anywhere you’d like to go.	This could be a place in nature, you could cuddle near a fire, or take a relaxing walk; you can go anywhere you’d like to go.	Это может быть место на природе, вы можете пообниматься у костра или совершить расслабляющую прогулку; вы можете пойти куда угодно.	This could be a place in nature, you could cuddle near a fire, or take a relaxing walk; you can go anywhere you’d like to go.
Encourage the part to rest in your presence if it can.	Encourage the part to rest in your presence if it can.	Поощряйте эту часть отдыхать в вашем присутствии, если она может.	Encourage the part to rest in your presence if it can.
You can talk if the part wants to, but it is not necessary; you can just be with the part for a while.	You can talk if the part wants to, but it is not necessary; you can just be with the part for a while.	Вы можете говорить, если часть хочет, но это не обязательно; ты можешь просто побыть с этой ролью какое-то время.	You can talk if the part wants to, but it is not necessary; you can just be with the part for a while.
If the part wants to talk, ask the part about its weariness.	If the part wants to talk, ask the part about its weariness.	Если часть хочет поговорить, спросите ее о ее усталости.	If the part wants to talk, ask the part about its weariness.
What causes the exhaustion?	What causes the exhaustion?	Что вызывает истощение?	What causes the exhaustion?
How long has it been doing what causes the tiredness?	How long has it been doing what causes the tiredness?	Как долго он занимается тем, что вызывает усталость?	How long has it been doing what causes the tiredness?
Why did the part take on this role?	Why did the part take on this role?	Почему роль взяла на себя эту роль?	Why did the part take on this role?
Listen and offer compassion for how hard this part is working.	Listen and offer compassion for how hard this part is working.	Выслушайте и проявите сострадание к тому, как усердно работает эта часть.	Listen and offer compassion for how hard this part is working.
Ask the part, “What are you afraid would happen if you stopped doing this role?”	Ask the part, “What are you afraid would happen if you stopped doing this role?”	Спросите часть: «Чего ты боишься, если ты перестанешь играть эту роль?»	Ask the part, “What are you afraid would happen if you stopped doing this role?”
Address the fears the part shares with you.	Address the fears the part shares with you.	Обратитесь к страхам, которые часть разделяет с вами.	Address the fears the part shares with you.
Offer hope by saying, “What if I could heal the vulnerable one you protect so you won’t be so weary. Would you be interested?”	Offer hope by saying, “What if I could heal the vulnerable one you protect so you won’t be so weary. Would you be interested?”	Предложите надежду, сказав: «Что, если бы я мог исцелить уязвимого человека, которого вы защищаете, чтобы вы не были так утомлены. Вам будет интересно?»	Offer hope by saying, “What if I could heal the vulnerable one you protect so you won’t be so weary. Would you be interested?”
Be with the part as it expresses its concerns or interests.	Be with the part as it expresses its concerns or interests.	Будьте с частью, когда она выражает свои заботы или интересы.	Be with the part as it expresses its concerns or interests.
If it has concerns, address them.	If it has concerns, address them.	Если у него есть проблемы, решите их.	If it has concerns, address them.
If the part is interested, let it know that all it has to do is give permission and step back.	If the part is interested, let it know that all it has to do is give permission and step back.	Если часть заинтересована, дайте ей знать, что все, что ей нужно сделать, это дать разрешение и отступить.	If the part is interested, let it know that all it has to do is give permission and step back.
Express gratitude for how hard this part is working and set an intention with the part.	Express gratitude for how hard this part is working and set an intention with the part.	Выразите благодарность за то, как усердно работает эта часть, и определите с этой частью намерение.	Express gratitude for how hard this part is working and set an intention with the part.
Bring your awareness to your breath, and when it feels right, reenter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.	Bring your awareness to your breath, and when it feels right, reenter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.	Перенесите свое осознание на свое дыхание, и когда оно почувствует себя нужным, вернитесь в этот момент и пространство. Медленно откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Bring your awareness to your breath, and when it feels right, reenter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: The Weary One Journal Questions	Exercise 2: The Weary One Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Вопросы для журнала «Усталый»	Exercise 2: The Weary One Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Weary One meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Weary One meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили медитацию «Усталый» и написали свой быстрый дневник, потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, ответив на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Weary One meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
What did you notice when you first connected with your part?	What did you notice when you first connected with your part?	Что вы заметили, когда впервые соединились со своей частью?	What did you notice when you first connected with your part?
Where and how does the weary part show up in your body?	Where and how does the weary part show up in your body?	Где и как в вашем теле появляется утомленная часть?	Where and how does the weary part show up in your body?
If there is an image connected with this part, draw it here or in your journal. Does this part have a name? If so, write it in your journal.	If there is an image connected with this part, draw it here or in your journal. Does this part have a name? If so, write it in your journal.	Если есть изображение, связанное с этой частью, нарисуйте его здесь или в своем дневнике. Есть ли у этой части название? Если да, напишите об этом в своем дневнике.	If there is an image connected with this part, draw it here or in your journal. Does this part have a name? If so, write it in your journal.
As you got to know the part, what did you learn about its weariness? Causes of the exhaustion	As you got to know the part, what did you learn about its weariness? Causes of the exhaustion	Познакомившись с этой деталью, что вы узнали о ее усталости? Причины истощения	As you got to know the part, what did you learn about its weariness? Causes of the exhaustion
How long it’s been doing its job	How long it’s been doing its job	Как долго он выполняет свою работу	How long it’s been doing its job
Why it took on its job	Why it took on its job	Почему он взялся за свою работу	Why it took on its job
How did you feel toward this part after hearing its story?	How did you feel toward this part after hearing its story?	Что вы почувствовали по отношению к этой части, услышав ее историю?	How did you feel toward this part after hearing its story?
What did you discover about this part’s fears about releasing its role?	What did you discover about this part’s fears about releasing its role?	Что вы узнали о страхах этой части по поводу освобождения от своей роли?	What did you discover about this part’s fears about releasing its role?
Did you notice a change in the part’s weariness during the meditation? If so, what did you notice?	Did you notice a change in the part’s weariness during the meditation? If so, what did you notice?	Заметили ли вы изменение усталости этой части во время медитации? Если да, то что вы заметили?	Did you notice a change in the part’s weariness during the meditation? If so, what did you notice?
Who is the vulnerable one this part protects?	Who is the vulnerable one this part protects?	Кто уязвим, кого защищает эта часть?	Who is the vulnerable one this part protects?
Is the part willing to step back? If not, why not?	Is the part willing to step back? If not, why not?	Готова ли часть отступить? Если нет, то почему?	Is the part willing to step back? If not, why not?
What intentions did you set with this part?	What intentions did you set with this part?	Какие намерения вы поставили перед этой частью?	What intentions did you set with this part?
Journal anything else about this experience you want to capture.	Journal anything else about this experience you want to capture.	Запишите еще что-нибудь об этом опыте, который вы хотите запечатлеть.	Journal anything else about this experience you want to capture.
Exercise 3: Hope Merchant Practice	Exercise 3: Hope Merchant Practice	Упражнение 3: Практика торговца надеждой	Exercise 3: Hope Merchant Practice
In this practice, you will get to know a protector and offer hope for change.	In this practice, you will get to know a protector and offer hope for change.	В этой практике вы познакомитесь с защитником и подарите надежду на перемены.	In this practice, you will get to know a protector and offer hope for change.
Step 1: Identify a part you want to get to know.	Step 1: Identify a part you want to get to know.	Шаг 1: Определите ту часть, которую вы хотите узнать.	Step 1: Identify a part you want to get to know.
Step 2: Notice where/how the part expresses in/around your body.	Step 2: Notice where/how the part expresses in/around your body.	Шаг 2: Обратите внимание, где/как эта часть проявляется внутри/вокруг вашего тела.	Step 2: Notice where/how the part expresses in/around your body.
Step 3: Focus on how you experience this part.	Step 3: Focus on how you experience this part.	Шаг 3: Сосредоточьтесь на том, как вы переживаете эту часть.	Step 3: Focus on how you experience this part.
Step 4: How do you feel toward this part? If it’s one of the eight Cs, send that energy to the part. If not one of the eight Cs, ask the new part to step back. If the part does not step back, spend time getting to know that part; address its fears. If and when it is willing to step back, move to Step 5.	Step 4: How do you feel toward this part? If it’s one of the eight Cs, send that energy to the part. If not one of the eight Cs, ask the new part to step back. If the part does not step back, spend time getting to know that part; address its fears. If and when it is willing to step back, move to Step 5.	Шаг 4: Как вы относитесь к этой части? Если это одна из восьми «С», направьте эту энергию в эту часть. Если это не одно из восьми С, попросите новую часть отступить. Если часть не отступает, потратьте время на ее изучение; разобраться со своими страхами. Если и когда он захочет отступить, переходите к шагу 5.	Step 4: How do you feel toward this part? If it’s one of the eight Cs, send that energy to the part. If not one of the eight Cs, ask the new part to step back. If the part does not step back, spend time getting to know that part; address its fears. If and when it is willing to step back, move to Step 5.
Step 5: Notice how the part responds to your Self-energy. If there is a positive shift, acknowledge it and offer appreciation.	Step 5: Notice how the part responds to your Self-energy. If there is a positive shift, acknowledge it and offer appreciation.	Шаг 5: Обратите внимание, как эта часть реагирует на вашу собственную энергию. Если есть положительный сдвиг, признайте это и выразите признательность.	Step 5: Notice how the part responds to your Self-energy. If there is a positive shift, acknowledge it and offer appreciation.
Step 6: Continue to extend Self-energy (one or more of the eight Cs).	Step 6: Continue to extend Self-energy (one or more of the eight Cs).	Шаг 6: Продолжайте расширять свою энергию (одну или несколько из восьми С).	Step 6: Continue to extend Self-energy (one or more of the eight Cs).
Step 7: Create a Self-to-part relationship by asking the part what it wants you to know about itself.	Step 7: Create a Self-to-part relationship by asking the part what it wants you to know about itself.	Шаг 7. Создайте отношения «Я-часть», спросив часть, что она хочет, чтобы вы знали о себе.	Step 7: Create a Self-to-part relationship by asking the part what it wants you to know about itself.
Step 8: Validate the part’s experiences.	Step 8: Validate the part’s experiences.	Шаг 8: Подтвердите опыт части.	Step 8: Validate the part’s experiences.
Step 9: Continue to extend Self-energy (one or more of the eight Cs).	Step 9: Continue to extend Self-energy (one or more of the eight Cs).	Шаг 9: Продолжайте расширять свою энергию (одну или несколько из восьми С).	Step 9: Continue to extend Self-energy (one or more of the eight Cs).
Step 10: Ask the part to share more of its story with you (it may use images, bodily sensations, words, etc.).	Step 10: Ask the part to share more of its story with you (it may use images, bodily sensations, words, etc.).	Шаг 10: Попросите часть рассказать вам больше своей истории (она может использовать образы, телесные ощущения, слова и т. д.).	Step 10: Ask the part to share more of its story with you (it may use images, bodily sensations, words, etc.).
Step 11: Find out what the part is afraid of by asking, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t [...]? (Use the part’s exact words for what’s it’s doing to protect you.)	Step 11: Find out what the part is afraid of by asking, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t [...]? (Use the part’s exact words for what’s it’s doing to protect you.)	Шаг 11: Узнайте, чего боится эта часть, спросив: «Чего вы боитесь, что произойдет, если вы не сделаете [...]? (Используйте точные слова части, чтобы описать, что она делает, чтобы защитить вас.)	Step 11: Find out what the part is afraid of by asking, “What are you afraid would happen if you didn’t [...]? (Use the part’s exact words for what’s it’s doing to protect you.)
Step 12: Offer hope by saying, “What if I could go to the one who feels [...] (use the part’s exact words) and heal it. Would you be interested?”	Step 12: Offer hope by saying, “What if I could go to the one who feels [...] (use the part’s exact words) and heal it. Would you be interested?”	Шаг 12: Предложите надежду, сказав: «Что, если бы я мог пойти к тому, кто чувствует [...] (используйте точные слова этой части) и исцелить его. Вам будет интересно?»	Step 12: Offer hope by saying, “What if I could go to the one who feels [...] (use the part’s exact words) and heal it. Would you be interested?”
Step 13: Let the part know it does not have to stop doing its job; it only needs to step back.	Step 13: Let the part know it does not have to stop doing its job; it only needs to step back.	Шаг 13: Сообщите детали, что ей не нужно прекращать выполнять свою работу; нужно только отступить.	Step 13: Let the part know it does not have to stop doing its job; it only needs to step back.
CHAPTER 10	CHAPTER 10	ГЛАВА 10	CHAPTER 10
Elemental Healing	Elemental Healing	Элементальное исцеление	Elemental Healing
Unburdening and Healing Your Parts	Unburdening and Healing Your Parts	Освобождение и исцеление ваших частей	Unburdening and Healing Your Parts
In the last chapter, we met my part Pricklee and discovered that she protected a nine-year-old part of me who experienced feelings of abandonment and being alone after the adults in her life hid the truth about her parents’ marriage from her. She knew in her gut that they were separated and getting divorced. She needed her grandmother, aunts, or parents to confirm what she already knew to be true. Because no one did, young Tamala was left to manage her emotions and started to doubt her own sense of reality. Everyone wanted her to continue with her summer as if nothing devastating was occurring in her life, but she couldn’t pretend and deny the real pain of her broken heart. Pricklee took over to protect this vulnerable, hurt, lonely part of me. She exiled the pained one and became hyper-vigilant in her need for predictability. When she didn’t get it, she became anxious, irritated, and angry for fear that I would experience the abandonment, heartbreak, and loneliness of the one she protects by keeping her exiled.	In the last chapter, we met my part Pricklee and discovered that she protected a nine-year-old part of me who experienced feelings of abandonment and being alone after the adults in her life hid the truth about her parents’ marriage from her. She knew in her gut that they were separated and getting divorced. She needed her grandmother, aunts, or parents to confirm what she already knew to be true. Because no one did, young Tamala was left to manage her emotions and started to doubt her own sense of reality. Everyone wanted her to continue with her summer as if nothing devastating was occurring in her life, but she couldn’t pretend and deny the real pain of her broken heart. Pricklee took over to protect this vulnerable, hurt, lonely part of me. She exiled the pained one and became hyper-vigilant in her need for predictability. When she didn’t get it, she became anxious, irritated, and angry for fear that I would experience the abandonment, heartbreak, and loneliness of the one she protects by keeping her exiled.	В последней главе мы познакомились с моей частью Прикли и обнаружили, что она защищает девятилетнюю часть меня, которая испытывала чувство покинутости и одиночества после того, как взрослые в ее жизни скрыли от нее правду о браке ее родителей. Она знала нутром, что они расстались и разводятся. Ей нужно было, чтобы ее бабушка, тети или родители подтвердили то, что, как она уже знала, было правдой. Поскольку никто этого не сделал, юной Тамале пришлось управлять своими эмоциями, и она начала сомневаться в собственном ощущении реальности. Все хотели, чтобы она продолжила лето, как будто в ее жизни не происходило ничего разрушительного, но она не могла притворяться и отрицать настоящую боль своего разбитого сердца. Прикли взял на себя защиту этой уязвимой, обиженной и одинокой части меня. Она изгнала обиженного и стала сверхбдительной в своей потребности в предсказуемости. Когда она этого не поняла, она стала тревожной, раздраженной и злой из-за страха, что я испытаю заброшенность, горе и одиночество того, кого она защищает, оставляя ее в изгнании.	In the last chapter, we met my part Pricklee and discovered that she protected a nine-year-old part of me who experienced feelings of abandonment and being alone after the adults in her life hid the truth about her parents’ marriage from her. She knew in her gut that they were separated and getting divorced. She needed her grandmother, aunts, or parents to confirm what she already knew to be true. Because no one did, young Tamala was left to manage her emotions and started to doubt her own sense of reality. Everyone wanted her to continue with her summer as if nothing devastating was occurring in her life, but she couldn’t pretend and deny the real pain of her broken heart. Pricklee took over to protect this vulnerable, hurt, lonely part of me. She exiled the pained one and became hyper-vigilant in her need for predictability. When she didn’t get it, she became anxious, irritated, and angry for fear that I would experience the abandonment, heartbreak, and loneliness of the one she protects by keeping her exiled.
Although Pricklee expressed skepticism about my ability to heal young Tamala, she allowed access. When I closed my eyes and went inside, I entered a space where I was able to see and even touch young Tamala. I saw my younger self crouching in a corner with her back to me. She was silently crying several feet away. My compassion for her was palpable. I wanted to go scoop her up and hold her, and I wanted to honor her space at the same time. I sent the energy of compassion I felt in her direction. It took several minutes for her to look over her shoulder toward me with interest. I smiled. I asked if I could come closer. She answered by scooting close enough for us to touch, although we didn’t. I continued to energetically share the energy of curiosity and compassion with her. This piqued her curiosity because she asked, “Who are you?” I told her, “I’m you all grown up.” My eyes welled up with her tears as she moved beside me close enough for our legs to touch. I felt her sadness and relief. She looked into my eyes and said, half a statement and half a question, “You’re me and I’m you?” I nodded. Then she asked, “What took you so long?” I simply answered, “I’m here for you now and want to get to know you.” I felt a rush of her deep sadness. But even with feeling her sadness, I was able to remain present with her continuing to extend my Self-energy of genuine curiosity.	Although Pricklee expressed skepticism about my ability to heal young Tamala, she allowed access. When I closed my eyes and went inside, I entered a space where I was able to see and even touch young Tamala. I saw my younger self crouching in a corner with her back to me. She was silently crying several feet away. My compassion for her was palpable. I wanted to go scoop her up and hold her, and I wanted to honor her space at the same time. I sent the energy of compassion I felt in her direction. It took several minutes for her to look over her shoulder toward me with interest. I smiled. I asked if I could come closer. She answered by scooting close enough for us to touch, although we didn’t. I continued to energetically share the energy of curiosity and compassion with her. This piqued her curiosity because she asked, “Who are you?” I told her, “I’m you all grown up.” My eyes welled up with her tears as she moved beside me close enough for our legs to touch. I felt her sadness and relief. She looked into my eyes and said, half a statement and half a question, “You’re me and I’m you?” I nodded. Then she asked, “What took you so long?” I simply answered, “I’m here for you now and want to get to know you.” I felt a rush of her deep sadness. But even with feeling her sadness, I was able to remain present with her continuing to extend my Self-energy of genuine curiosity.	Хотя Прикли выразила скептицизм по поводу моей способности исцелить юную Тамалу, она разрешила доступ. Когда я закрыл глаза и вошел внутрь, я вошел в пространство, где смог увидеть и даже прикоснуться к юной Тамале. Я увидел себя, младшую, сидевшую в углу спиной ко мне. Она тихо плакала в нескольких футах от меня. Мое сострадание к ней было ощутимым. Мне хотелось подхватить ее и подержать, и в то же время я хотел почтить ее пространство. Я направил энергию сострадания, которую чувствовал, в ее сторону. Ей потребовалось несколько минут, чтобы с интересом оглянуться на меня через плечо. Я улыбнулся. Я спросил, могу ли я подойти поближе. В ответ она пододвинулась достаточно близко, чтобы мы могли коснуться ее, хотя мы этого не сделали. Я продолжал энергично делиться с ней энергией любопытства и сострадания. Это возбудило ее любопытство, потому что она спросила: «Кто ты?» Я сказал ей: «Я — ты уже взрослая». Мои глаза наполнились ее слезами, когда она подошла ко мне настолько близко, что наши ноги соприкоснулись. Я почувствовал ее печаль и облегчение. Она посмотрела мне в глаза и сказала наполовину утверждением, наполовину вопросом: «Ты — это я, а я — это ты?» Я кивнул. Затем она спросила: «Почему ты так долго?» Я просто ответил: «Сейчас я здесь ради тебя и хочу с тобой познакомиться». Я почувствовал прилив ее глубокой печали. Но даже чувствуя ее печаль, я смог оставаться рядом с ней, продолжая распространять свою энергию истинного любопытства.	Although Pricklee expressed skepticism about my ability to heal young Tamala, she allowed access. When I closed my eyes and went inside, I entered a space where I was able to see and even touch young Tamala. I saw my younger self crouching in a corner with her back to me. She was silently crying several feet away. My compassion for her was palpable. I wanted to go scoop her up and hold her, and I wanted to honor her space at the same time. I sent the energy of compassion I felt in her direction. It took several minutes for her to look over her shoulder toward me with interest. I smiled. I asked if I could come closer. She answered by scooting close enough for us to touch, although we didn’t. I continued to energetically share the energy of curiosity and compassion with her. This piqued her curiosity because she asked, “Who are you?” I told her, “I’m you all grown up.” My eyes welled up with her tears as she moved beside me close enough for our legs to touch. I felt her sadness and relief. She looked into my eyes and said, half a statement and half a question, “You’re me and I’m you?” I nodded. Then she asked, “What took you so long?” I simply answered, “I’m here for you now and want to get to know you.” I felt a rush of her deep sadness. But even with feeling her sadness, I was able to remain present with her continuing to extend my Self-energy of genuine curiosity.
Tearfully, she said, “No one loves me enough to tell me the truth.” She went on to share how the adults in her life broke her heart. They made it so she could not trust herself any longer. She knew that things were not okay at home when she saw the return address on the letter from her father to her grandmother. But for some reason, the adults tried to convince her that everything was fine. She didn’t understand why they didn’t love her enough to tell her the truth. She was further confused by her grandmother’s lies because she herself was always told to tell the truth. She came to believe that she wasn’t worth being told the truth. When she shared the intense agony of her worthlessness, her body crumpled, and a torrent of tears fell from my eyes. I felt profoundly connected to her in this moment, and my compassion intensified. I reached for her, and she snuggled to the curves of my body, allowing me to comfort her. I let her know I could hold every pain she experienced and that she was no longer alone. I felt her body relax, and her tears began to subside. I softly asked, “Is there more you want to share?” She nodded and asserted, “I trusted myself before this happened. I knew things, and I didn’t know how I knew them. I trusted what I knew because it felt right. But this made me distrust myself. I lost my gift.” I supportively offered, “Are you ready to release your burdens from that experience?” She nodded eagerly.	Tearfully, she said, “No one loves me enough to tell me the truth.” She went on to share how the adults in her life broke her heart. They made it so she could not trust herself any longer. She knew that things were not okay at home when she saw the return address on the letter from her father to her grandmother. But for some reason, the adults tried to convince her that everything was fine. She didn’t understand why they didn’t love her enough to tell her the truth. She was further confused by her grandmother’s lies because she herself was always told to tell the truth. She came to believe that she wasn’t worth being told the truth. When she shared the intense agony of her worthlessness, her body crumpled, and a torrent of tears fell from my eyes. I felt profoundly connected to her in this moment, and my compassion intensified. I reached for her, and she snuggled to the curves of my body, allowing me to comfort her. I let her know I could hold every pain she experienced and that she was no longer alone. I felt her body relax, and her tears began to subside. I softly asked, “Is there more you want to share?” She nodded and asserted, “I trusted myself before this happened. I knew things, and I didn’t know how I knew them. I trusted what I knew because it felt right. But this made me distrust myself. I lost my gift.” I supportively offered, “Are you ready to release your burdens from that experience?” She nodded eagerly.	Со слезами на глазах она сказала: «Никто не любит меня настолько, чтобы сказать мне правду». Далее она рассказала, как взрослые в ее жизни разбили ей сердце. Они сделали это, чтобы она больше не могла доверять себе. Она поняла, что дома не все в порядке, когда увидела обратный адрес в письме отца к бабушке. Но взрослые почему-то пытались убедить ее, что все в порядке. Она не понимала, почему они не любили ее настолько, чтобы сказать ей правду. Ее еще больше смущала ложь бабушки, потому что ей самой всегда говорили говорить правду. Она пришла к выводу, что она не достойна того, чтобы ей говорили правду. Когда она разделила сильную агонию своей никчемности, ее тело сжалось, и поток слез полился из моих глаз. В этот момент я почувствовал глубокую связь с ней, и мое сострадание усилилось. Я потянулся к ней, и она прижалась к изгибам моего тела, позволяя мне утешить ее. Я дал ей понять, что могу выдержать любую боль, которую она испытывала, и что она больше не одна. Я почувствовал, как ее тело расслабилось, и ее слезы начали утихать. Я мягко спросил: «Вы хотите еще чем-нибудь поделиться?» Она кивнула и заявила: «Я доверяла себе до того, как это произошло. Я знал некоторые вещи, но не знал, откуда я их знаю. Я доверял тому, что знал, потому что это казалось правильным. Но это заставило меня не доверять себе. Я потерял свой дар». Я поддержал его: «Готовы ли вы освободиться от бремени этого опыта?» Она энергично кивнула.	Tearfully, she said, “No one loves me enough to tell me the truth.” She went on to share how the adults in her life broke her heart. They made it so she could not trust herself any longer. She knew that things were not okay at home when she saw the return address on the letter from her father to her grandmother. But for some reason, the adults tried to convince her that everything was fine. She didn’t understand why they didn’t love her enough to tell her the truth. She was further confused by her grandmother’s lies because she herself was always told to tell the truth. She came to believe that she wasn’t worth being told the truth. When she shared the intense agony of her worthlessness, her body crumpled, and a torrent of tears fell from my eyes. I felt profoundly connected to her in this moment, and my compassion intensified. I reached for her, and she snuggled to the curves of my body, allowing me to comfort her. I let her know I could hold every pain she experienced and that she was no longer alone. I felt her body relax, and her tears began to subside. I softly asked, “Is there more you want to share?” She nodded and asserted, “I trusted myself before this happened. I knew things, and I didn’t know how I knew them. I trusted what I knew because it felt right. But this made me distrust myself. I lost my gift.” I supportively offered, “Are you ready to release your burdens from that experience?” She nodded eagerly.
IFS CONCEPT 1: BURDENS REVISITED	IFS CONCEPT 1: BURDENS REVISITED	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: НОВЫЙ ОБЗОР бремени	IFS CONCEPT 1: BURDENS REVISITED
Burdens are created out of our woundedness. Neglect, abuse, rejection, lack of attunement to our needs, boundary violations, attachment injuries—all these can result in wounding. Our parts get the message that something is wrong with them. From these experiences parts become burdened with extreme beliefs about themselves, others, and the world. These burdens become a part of them, but they are not who the part naturally is. In most cases, parts are not created burdened; rather, their essential nature becomes obscured by the burdens.	Burdens are created out of our woundedness. Neglect, abuse, rejection, lack of attunement to our needs, boundary violations, attachment injuries—all these can result in wounding. Our parts get the message that something is wrong with them. From these experiences parts become burdened with extreme beliefs about themselves, others, and the world. These burdens become a part of them, but they are not who the part naturally is. In most cases, parts are not created burdened; rather, their essential nature becomes obscured by the burdens.	Бремя создается нашей ранимостью. Пренебрежение, жестокое обращение, отвержение, отсутствие настройки на наши потребности, нарушение границ, травмы привязанности — все это может привести к ранениям. Наши части получают сообщение о том, что с ними что-то не так. Из-за этого опыта некоторые части становятся обремененными крайними убеждениями о себе, других и мире. Это бремя становится их частью, но они не являются той частью, которая естественным образом является этой частью. В большинстве случаев детали создаются не отягощенными; скорее, их сущностная природа затемняется бременем.	Burdens are created out of our woundedness. Neglect, abuse, rejection, lack of attunement to our needs, boundary violations, attachment injuries—all these can result in wounding. Our parts get the message that something is wrong with them. From these experiences parts become burdened with extreme beliefs about themselves, others, and the world. These burdens become a part of them, but they are not who the part naturally is. In most cases, parts are not created burdened; rather, their essential nature becomes obscured by the burdens.
In the example of my nine-year-old exiled part, she was burdened with feelings of worthlessness, abandonment, aloneness, and the physical pain of brokenheartedness. These burdens covered up her natural ability to trust her intuition, planting the seeds of self-doubt. Healing involves helping our exiled parts release their burdens.	In the example of my nine-year-old exiled part, she was burdened with feelings of worthlessness, abandonment, aloneness, and the physical pain of brokenheartedness. These burdens covered up her natural ability to trust her intuition, planting the seeds of self-doubt. Healing involves helping our exiled parts release their burdens.	В примере с моей девятилетней изгнанницей она была отягощена чувствами никчемности, покинутости, одиночества и физической болью разбитого сердца. Это бремя скрывало ее естественную способность доверять своей интуиции, посеяв семена неуверенности в себе. Исцеление включает в себя помощь нашим изгнанным частям освободиться от своего бремени.	In the example of my nine-year-old exiled part, she was burdened with feelings of worthlessness, abandonment, aloneness, and the physical pain of brokenheartedness. These burdens covered up her natural ability to trust her intuition, planting the seeds of self-doubt. Healing involves helping our exiled parts release their burdens.
IFS CONCEPT 2: WITNESSING REVISITED	IFS CONCEPT 2: WITNESSING REVISITED	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: ВОЗВРАТ СВИДЕТЕЛЬСТВА	IFS CONCEPT 2: WITNESSING REVISITED
The process of healing an exile is called unburdening, and the key step in it is witnessing. The goal of witnessing is for the exiled part to feel heard and understood by Self. It is important to slow down and not rush the process of getting to know exiled parts. When a protector gives permission and access to get to know an exile, we want to notice how we experience the exile when we go inside. The part may express itself as a sensation in the body such as tightness, numbness, chills, or any other sensation. It may allow us to experience its emotions like terror, sadness, or hopelessness. It may even present in physical form. Sometimes our exiled parts show up as a younger version of ourselves.	The process of healing an exile is called unburdening, and the key step in it is witnessing. The goal of witnessing is for the exiled part to feel heard and understood by Self. It is important to slow down and not rush the process of getting to know exiled parts. When a protector gives permission and access to get to know an exile, we want to notice how we experience the exile when we go inside. The part may express itself as a sensation in the body such as tightness, numbness, chills, or any other sensation. It may allow us to experience its emotions like terror, sadness, or hopelessness. It may even present in physical form. Sometimes our exiled parts show up as a younger version of ourselves.	Процесс исцеления изгнанника называется освобождением, и ключевым шагом в нем является свидетельствование. Цель свидетельствования состоит в том, чтобы изгнанная часть почувствовала, что ее «Я» слышит и понимает. Важно замедлить и не торопить процесс знакомства с сосланными частями. Когда защитник дает разрешение и доступ для знакомства с изгнанником, мы хотим отметить, как мы переживаем изгнание, когда заходим внутрь. Эта часть может проявляться в виде ощущения в теле, такого как стеснение, онемение, озноб или любое другое ощущение. Это может позволить нам испытать такие эмоции, как ужас, печаль или безнадежность. Оно может даже присутствовать в физической форме. Иногда наши изгнанные части проявляются как более молодая версия нас самих.	The process of healing an exile is called unburdening, and the key step in it is witnessing. The goal of witnessing is for the exiled part to feel heard and understood by Self. It is important to slow down and not rush the process of getting to know exiled parts. When a protector gives permission and access to get to know an exile, we want to notice how we experience the exile when we go inside. The part may express itself as a sensation in the body such as tightness, numbness, chills, or any other sensation. It may allow us to experience its emotions like terror, sadness, or hopelessness. It may even present in physical form. Sometimes our exiled parts show up as a younger version of ourselves.
It is not uncommon for exile parts to blend with us. They have been hidden away for a long time and are needy of attention. As we learned earlier, we cannot form a relationship with a part when it is blended with us. We want to ask the exile part early on not to blend with us. If it does, we can ask the part to unblend. However, it is easier and more efficient to ask a part not to blend in the beginning than it is to ask it to unblend later.	It is not uncommon for exile parts to blend with us. They have been hidden away for a long time and are needy of attention. As we learned earlier, we cannot form a relationship with a part when it is blended with us. We want to ask the exile part early on not to blend with us. If it does, we can ask the part to unblend. However, it is easier and more efficient to ask a part not to blend in the beginning than it is to ask it to unblend later.	Части изгнанников нередко сливаются с нами. Они давно спрятаны и требуют внимания. Как мы узнали ранее, мы не можем сформировать отношения с частью, когда она слита с нами. Мы хотим попросить изгнанников с самого начала не смешиваться с нами. Если это так, мы можем попросить часть растечься. Однако проще и эффективнее попросить часть не сливаться вначале, чем просить ее разъединиться позже.	It is not uncommon for exile parts to blend with us. They have been hidden away for a long time and are needy of attention. As we learned earlier, we cannot form a relationship with a part when it is blended with us. We want to ask the exile part early on not to blend with us. If it does, we can ask the part to unblend. However, it is easier and more efficient to ask a part not to blend in the beginning than it is to ask it to unblend later.
Regardless of the way exile parts first express themselves, we need to build a trusting relationship with them. We accomplish this by extending Self-energy to the part. Upon first meeting our exiled parts, we may feel compassion for what they have gone through. We also may feel connected to them and curious about their experiences. If they are scared or upset, we may feel calm toward them. Whatever C-word we feel, we let them feel it too, energetically. The part may not notice us or may feel hostile toward us; we want to continue to send our Self-energy to it until it shifts in some way. Experiencing our compassion, curiosity, confidence, etc., will help the exile calm and notice us. It may even get curious about who we are and why we are present. From this awareness, we can begin to build a relationship with the exile. Remember these are usually young parts and we want to engage them as such. Think about how you would interact with a young child. We may soften or lower our voice, speak slower, get on the child’s level, offer a physical connection if the child is open to it. We would use these same methods to build trust with our exiled parts.	Regardless of the way exile parts first express themselves, we need to build a trusting relationship with them. We accomplish this by extending Self-energy to the part. Upon first meeting our exiled parts, we may feel compassion for what they have gone through. We also may feel connected to them and curious about their experiences. If they are scared or upset, we may feel calm toward them. Whatever C-word we feel, we let them feel it too, energetically. The part may not notice us or may feel hostile toward us; we want to continue to send our Self-energy to it until it shifts in some way. Experiencing our compassion, curiosity, confidence, etc., will help the exile calm and notice us. It may even get curious about who we are and why we are present. From this awareness, we can begin to build a relationship with the exile. Remember these are usually young parts and we want to engage them as such. Think about how you would interact with a young child. We may soften or lower our voice, speak slower, get on the child’s level, offer a physical connection if the child is open to it. We would use these same methods to build trust with our exiled parts.	Независимо от того, как части изгнания сначала проявляют себя, нам необходимо построить с ними доверительные отношения. Мы достигаем этого, распространяя на эту часть свою собственную энергию. При первой встрече с нашими изгнанными частями мы можем почувствовать сострадание к тому, через что им пришлось пройти. Мы также можем чувствовать связь с ними и интересоваться их опытом. Если они напуганы или расстроены, мы можем относиться к ним спокойно. Какое бы слово на букву C мы ни чувствовали, мы позволяем им тоже это почувствовать, энергетически. Эта часть может нас не замечать или относиться к нам враждебно; мы хотим продолжать посылать туда нашу собственную энергию до тех пор, пока она каким-то образом не изменится. Переживание нашего сострадания, любопытства, уверенности и т. д. поможет изгнаннику успокоиться и заметить нас. Ему может даже стать любопытно, кто мы и почему мы здесь. Исходя из этого осознания, мы можем начать строить отношения с изгнанником. Помните, что обычно это молодые люди, и мы хотим привлечь их как таковых. Подумайте, как бы вы общались с маленьким ребенком. Мы можем смягчить или понизить голос, говорить медленнее, подняться на уровень ребенка, предложить физическую связь, если ребенок открыт для этого. Мы будем использовать те же самые методы, чтобы завоевать доверие наших изгнанных частей.	Regardless of the way exile parts first express themselves, we need to build a trusting relationship with them. We accomplish this by extending Self-energy to the part. Upon first meeting our exiled parts, we may feel compassion for what they have gone through. We also may feel connected to them and curious about their experiences. If they are scared or upset, we may feel calm toward them. Whatever C-word we feel, we let them feel it too, energetically. The part may not notice us or may feel hostile toward us; we want to continue to send our Self-energy to it until it shifts in some way. Experiencing our compassion, curiosity, confidence, etc., will help the exile calm and notice us. It may even get curious about who we are and why we are present. From this awareness, we can begin to build a relationship with the exile. Remember these are usually young parts and we want to engage them as such. Think about how you would interact with a young child. We may soften or lower our voice, speak slower, get on the child’s level, offer a physical connection if the child is open to it. We would use these same methods to build trust with our exiled parts.
After there is trust between you and your exile, you can move into witnessing. Witnessing is the process by which we learn the exiled part’s story. How was it wounded? The pains and burdens it carries. We let the part know that we want to know about it. You can ask, “What is it you’d like me to know about you?” Listen and be with the part however it needs you to be with it. The beauty of Self is it is intuitive. When we are Self-led, we don’t have to know at a thinking level what to do to support our exiled parts. The part may use various avenues to share its story. Sometimes parts share with images or a movie of what happened to them. There may be multiple scenes they want to share with you. They could use words, sensations, emotions, memories as ways to let you know about their experiences. The process of witnessing takes as long as it needs for the part to share everything it wants to share with you. The most important part of this process is that the part feels heard and validated by you. Up until this point, the part hasn’t had the opportunity to share its story with a compassionate listener who doesn’t judge it.	After there is trust between you and your exile, you can move into witnessing. Witnessing is the process by which we learn the exiled part’s story. How was it wounded? The pains and burdens it carries. We let the part know that we want to know about it. You can ask, “What is it you’d like me to know about you?” Listen and be with the part however it needs you to be with it. The beauty of Self is it is intuitive. When we are Self-led, we don’t have to know at a thinking level what to do to support our exiled parts. The part may use various avenues to share its story. Sometimes parts share with images or a movie of what happened to them. There may be multiple scenes they want to share with you. They could use words, sensations, emotions, memories as ways to let you know about their experiences. The process of witnessing takes as long as it needs for the part to share everything it wants to share with you. The most important part of this process is that the part feels heard and validated by you. Up until this point, the part hasn’t had the opportunity to share its story with a compassionate listener who doesn’t judge it.	После того, как между вами и вашим изгнанником возникнет доверие, вы можете перейти к свидетельствованию. Свидетельствование – это процесс, посредством которого мы узнаем историю изгнанной части. Как оно было ранено? Боль и бремя, которые оно несет. Мы сообщаем части, что хотим о ней знать. Вы можете спросить: «Что вы хотите, чтобы я знал о вас?» Слушайте и будьте с этой частью, как бы ей ни хотелось, чтобы вы были с ней. Красота «Я» в том, что оно интуитивно понятно. Когда мы самостоятельны, нам не нужно на уровне мышления знать, что делать, чтобы поддержать наши изгнанные части. Часть может использовать различные способы, чтобы поделиться своей историей. Иногда части делятся изображениями или фильмами о том, что с ними произошло. Они могут поделиться с вами несколькими сценами. Они могли использовать слова, ощущения, эмоции, воспоминания как способы сообщить вам о своем опыте. Процесс свидетельствования занимает столько времени, сколько необходимо части, чтобы поделиться с вами всем, чем она хочет поделиться. Самая важная часть этого процесса заключается в том, что вы чувствуете, что эта часть услышана и одобрена. До этого момента у этой партии не было возможности поделиться своей историей с сострадательным слушателем, который ее не осуждает.	After there is trust between you and your exile, you can move into witnessing. Witnessing is the process by which we learn the exiled part’s story. How was it wounded? The pains and burdens it carries. We let the part know that we want to know about it. You can ask, “What is it you’d like me to know about you?” Listen and be with the part however it needs you to be with it. The beauty of Self is it is intuitive. When we are Self-led, we don’t have to know at a thinking level what to do to support our exiled parts. The part may use various avenues to share its story. Sometimes parts share with images or a movie of what happened to them. There may be multiple scenes they want to share with you. They could use words, sensations, emotions, memories as ways to let you know about their experiences. The process of witnessing takes as long as it needs for the part to share everything it wants to share with you. The most important part of this process is that the part feels heard and validated by you. Up until this point, the part hasn’t had the opportunity to share its story with a compassionate listener who doesn’t judge it.
In the witnessing, other parts may get overwhelmed, concerned, or fearful about what the exile is sharing. If this happens, ask those parts to step back to allow you to continue to witness the exile’s experience. If the parts are unwilling to step back, take time to hear their concerns or fears. Let them know that you want to help them by helping the exile to heal. Their fears are warranted given their experiences too. Listen to them for as long as it takes to address their fears and return to the exile. The witnessing process is complete when the exile feels understood by Self. When the part expresses that it does feel heard and understood and has nothing more to share, we can move forward.	In the witnessing, other parts may get overwhelmed, concerned, or fearful about what the exile is sharing. If this happens, ask those parts to step back to allow you to continue to witness the exile’s experience. If the parts are unwilling to step back, take time to hear their concerns or fears. Let them know that you want to help them by helping the exile to heal. Their fears are warranted given their experiences too. Listen to them for as long as it takes to address their fears and return to the exile. The witnessing process is complete when the exile feels understood by Self. When the part expresses that it does feel heard and understood and has nothing more to share, we can move forward.	Во время свидетельствования другие части могут быть потрясены, обеспокоены или напуганы тем, чем делится изгнанник. Если это произойдет, попросите эти части отступить, чтобы вы могли продолжать наблюдать за переживаниями изгнанника. Если части не желают отступать, найдите время, чтобы выслушать их опасения и опасения. Дайте им понять, что вы хотите помочь им, помогая изгнаннику исцелиться. Их опасения оправданы, учитывая их опыт. Слушайте их столько, сколько потребуется, чтобы избавиться от своих страхов и вернуться в изгнание. Процесс свидетельствования завершается, когда изгнанник чувствует, что его «Я» понимает. Когда часть выражает, что она чувствует себя услышанной и понятой и ей больше нечем поделиться, мы можем двигаться дальше.	In the witnessing, other parts may get overwhelmed, concerned, or fearful about what the exile is sharing. If this happens, ask those parts to step back to allow you to continue to witness the exile’s experience. If the parts are unwilling to step back, take time to hear their concerns or fears. Let them know that you want to help them by helping the exile to heal. Their fears are warranted given their experiences too. Listen to them for as long as it takes to address their fears and return to the exile. The witnessing process is complete when the exile feels understood by Self. When the part expresses that it does feel heard and understood and has nothing more to share, we can move forward.
IFS CONCEPT 3: THE DO-OVER	IFS CONCEPT 3: THE DO-OVER	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 3: ПЕРЕВЕРНЕНИЕ	IFS CONCEPT 3: THE DO-OVER
Sometimes as part of the healing process, exiles need for something to occur in the scenes from the past that didn’t initially happen; however, this may not be needed for all exiles. As an example, they need support they didn’t receive, or they need to say something or do something that they couldn’t do or say at the time. As part of the witnessing process, you can offer your exile a do-over.	Sometimes as part of the healing process, exiles need for something to occur in the scenes from the past that didn’t initially happen; however, this may not be needed for all exiles. As an example, they need support they didn’t receive, or they need to say something or do something that they couldn’t do or say at the time. As part of the witnessing process, you can offer your exile a do-over.	Иногда в рамках процесса исцеления изгнанникам необходимо, чтобы в сценах прошлого произошло что-то, чего изначально не было; однако это может понадобиться не всем ссыльным. Например, им нужна поддержка, которую они не получили, или им нужно что-то сказать или сделать что-то, чего они не могли сделать или сказать в тот момент. В рамках процесса свидетельствования вы можете предложить изгнаннику новую жизнь.	Sometimes as part of the healing process, exiles need for something to occur in the scenes from the past that didn’t initially happen; however, this may not be needed for all exiles. As an example, they need support they didn’t receive, or they need to say something or do something that they couldn’t do or say at the time. As part of the witnessing process, you can offer your exile a do-over.
A do-over is an emotionally corrective experience. The exile has an opportunity to get their needs met in the manner that eluded them originally. This is accomplished by asking your exile, “What do you need to happen that didn’t?” or “How did you need someone to be with you back then?” Whatever your part requests of you, provide it for them. They may ask you to stand up to a bully or listen to and hold them or help them with big emotions they don’t understand and can’t regulate.	A do-over is an emotionally corrective experience. The exile has an opportunity to get their needs met in the manner that eluded them originally. This is accomplished by asking your exile, “What do you need to happen that didn’t?” or “How did you need someone to be with you back then?” Whatever your part requests of you, provide it for them. They may ask you to stand up to a bully or listen to and hold them or help them with big emotions they don’t understand and can’t regulate.	Переделка — это эмоционально корректирующий опыт. У изгнанников есть возможность удовлетворить свои потребности так, как это ускользнуло от них изначально. Это достигается путем вопроса изгнаннику: «Что тебе нужно, чтобы произошло, чего не произошло?» или «Как тебе тогда нужно было, чтобы кто-то был рядом с тобой?» Чего бы ни требовала от вас ваша часть, предоставьте ей это. Они могут попросить вас противостоять хулигану, выслушать и удержать их, или помочь им с сильными эмоциями, которые они не понимают и не могут контролировать.	A do-over is an emotionally corrective experience. The exile has an opportunity to get their needs met in the manner that eluded them originally. This is accomplished by asking your exile, “What do you need to happen that didn’t?” or “How did you need someone to be with you back then?” Whatever your part requests of you, provide it for them. They may ask you to stand up to a bully or listen to and hold them or help them with big emotions they don’t understand and can’t regulate.
When I offered a do-over to my nine-year-old part, she needed three things to happen differently. First, she needed to be told the truth about her dad’s address change and her parents’ separation. Second, she needed this truth to validate her intuition. Lastly, she needed the adults to help her with the pain of her parents’ separation, let her experience her emotions fully, and not expect her to pretend everything was all right.	When I offered a do-over to my nine-year-old part, she needed three things to happen differently. First, she needed to be told the truth about her dad’s address change and her parents’ separation. Second, she needed this truth to validate her intuition. Lastly, she needed the adults to help her with the pain of her parents’ separation, let her experience her emotions fully, and not expect her to pretend everything was all right.	Когда я предложил переделать свою девятилетнюю роль, ей нужно было, чтобы три вещи произошли по-другому. Во-первых, ей нужно было сказать правду о смене адреса ее отца и разводе родителей. Во-вторых, ей нужна была эта истина, чтобы подтвердить свою интуицию. Наконец, ей нужно было, чтобы взрослые помогли ей пережить боль разлуки родителей, позволили ей полностью пережить свои эмоции, а не ждали, что она будет притворяться, что все в порядке.	When I offered a do-over to my nine-year-old part, she needed three things to happen differently. First, she needed to be told the truth about her dad’s address change and her parents’ separation. Second, she needed this truth to validate her intuition. Lastly, she needed the adults to help her with the pain of her parents’ separation, let her experience her emotions fully, and not expect her to pretend everything was all right.
IFS CONCEPT 4: RETRIEVAL	IFS CONCEPT 4: RETRIEVAL	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 4: ПОИСК	IFS CONCEPT 4: RETRIEVAL
Some exiled parts may be stuck or frozen in a past trauma scene. The part reexperiences their wounding, unable to extricate themselves from perpetual pain. When this is true, retrieval is necessary. Again, this is a step not necessary for every exile. Retrieval is offering the part a choice to leave the trauma scene for a safe place. Parts often choose to come to the present with Self. They may also choose to go to a place that was safe in the past, such as a grandparent’s home. They can also go to an imaginary place or fun location like an amusement park or beach. It is completely the part’s choice. Self can escort the part to any place of its choosing. To begin the retrieval, Self simply needs to ask the part, “Are you ready to leave that time and place to come to the present with me or to any other safe place, imaginary or real?” If the part does not want to leave the past, inquire why it doesn’t want to leave. Sometimes more witnessing is required. The part may not want to leave until it tells more of its story. Or something more may need to happen in the past. It may be concerned about who it is leaving behind, such as younger siblings who were also impacted by the trauma experience. If this is true, invite the part to bring their siblings with them. Once the part is in a safe place, the unburdening can begin.	Some exiled parts may be stuck or frozen in a past trauma scene. The part reexperiences their wounding, unable to extricate themselves from perpetual pain. When this is true, retrieval is necessary. Again, this is a step not necessary for every exile. Retrieval is offering the part a choice to leave the trauma scene for a safe place. Parts often choose to come to the present with Self. They may also choose to go to a place that was safe in the past, such as a grandparent’s home. They can also go to an imaginary place or fun location like an amusement park or beach. It is completely the part’s choice. Self can escort the part to any place of its choosing. To begin the retrieval, Self simply needs to ask the part, “Are you ready to leave that time and place to come to the present with me or to any other safe place, imaginary or real?” If the part does not want to leave the past, inquire why it doesn’t want to leave. Sometimes more witnessing is required. The part may not want to leave until it tells more of its story. Or something more may need to happen in the past. It may be concerned about who it is leaving behind, such as younger siblings who were also impacted by the trauma experience. If this is true, invite the part to bring their siblings with them. Once the part is in a safe place, the unburdening can begin.	Некоторые изгнанные части могут застрять или застыть в сцене прошлой травмы. Часть вновь переживает свои ранения, не в силах избавиться от вечной боли. Если это так, необходимо восстановление. Опять же, этот шаг необходим не каждому изгнаннику. Возвращение предлагает части возможность покинуть место травмы и перебраться в безопасное место. Части часто предпочитают прийти в настоящее вместе с «Я». Они также могут выбрать место, которое в прошлом было безопасным, например, дом бабушки и дедушки. Они также могут пойти в воображаемое место или интересное место, например, в парк развлечений или на пляж. Это полностью выбор детали. Селф может сопроводить деталь в любое место по своему выбору. Чтобы начать поиск, Я просто должен спросить часть: «Готовы ли вы покинуть это время и место, чтобы прийти со мной в настоящее или в любое другое безопасное место, воображаемое или реальное?» Если часть не хочет уходить из прошлого, спросите, почему она не хочет уходить. Иногда требуется больше свидетельствования. Часть, возможно, не захочет уходить, пока не расскажет больше о своей истории. Или что-то еще, возможно, должно произойти в прошлом. Он может быть обеспокоен тем, кого он оставляет позади, например, младшими братьями и сестрами, на которых также повлияла травма. Если это правда, предложите этой части привести с собой своих братьев и сестер. Как только деталь окажется в безопасном месте, можно начинать разгрузку.	Some exiled parts may be stuck or frozen in a past trauma scene. The part reexperiences their wounding, unable to extricate themselves from perpetual pain. When this is true, retrieval is necessary. Again, this is a step not necessary for every exile. Retrieval is offering the part a choice to leave the trauma scene for a safe place. Parts often choose to come to the present with Self. They may also choose to go to a place that was safe in the past, such as a grandparent’s home. They can also go to an imaginary place or fun location like an amusement park or beach. It is completely the part’s choice. Self can escort the part to any place of its choosing. To begin the retrieval, Self simply needs to ask the part, “Are you ready to leave that time and place to come to the present with me or to any other safe place, imaginary or real?” If the part does not want to leave the past, inquire why it doesn’t want to leave. Sometimes more witnessing is required. The part may not want to leave until it tells more of its story. Or something more may need to happen in the past. It may be concerned about who it is leaving behind, such as younger siblings who were also impacted by the trauma experience. If this is true, invite the part to bring their siblings with them. Once the part is in a safe place, the unburdening can begin.
Retrieval was not necessary with my nine-year-old exile. She did not feel frozen in the past; she had the ability to leave on her own. When she sat next to me while building trust, she was no longer in the past and felt safe with me in the present.	Retrieval was not necessary with my nine-year-old exile. She did not feel frozen in the past; she had the ability to leave on her own. When she sat next to me while building trust, she was no longer in the past and felt safe with me in the present.	Моему девятилетнему изгнаннику в возвращении не было необходимости. Она не чувствовала себя застывшей в прошлом; у нее была возможность уйти самостоятельно. Когда она сидела рядом со мной, укрепляя доверие, она больше не была в прошлом и чувствовала себя в безопасности со мной в настоящем.	Retrieval was not necessary with my nine-year-old exile. She did not feel frozen in the past; she had the ability to leave on her own. When she sat next to me while building trust, she was no longer in the past and felt safe with me in the present.
IFS CONCEPT 5: UNBURDENING	IFS CONCEPT 5: UNBURDENING	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 5: СНИЖЕНИЕ бремени	IFS CONCEPT 5: UNBURDENING
Unburdening is the process by which the exile releases their burdens. This step is crucial to the healing of the exile. Burdens include extreme beliefs like “I am worthless” or “I am unlovable”; extreme bodily sensations such as reexperiencing the effects of neglect or abuse; and intense feelings and emotions such as shame. Because burdens are often held in the body, this is where we begin with the unburdening process. Self asks the part where it notices the burden in or around its body. Once the part connects with where the burden is, Self asks the part if it is ready to release the burden. Parts are usually eager to let go of their burdens. However, sometimes they are reluctant. In this case, the part may need additional time in witnessing, or Self can explore the fears the part has about releasing the burden. If the exile is ready to release their burdens, the Self can offer the release of the burdens to one of the elements: fire, water, air, earth, or any other way the part would like to release the burdens. It is important for the part to release the burden from where it’s located in the body. Self supports the part in releasing the burden by helping it set up the release to the elements or simply by being present during the unburdening. The burdens can be released together at one time or individually. It’s crucial to check with the exile to see if there’s more to unburden after each burden is released. Similar to witnessing, it is the part that determines when the unburdening is complete.	Unburdening is the process by which the exile releases their burdens. This step is crucial to the healing of the exile. Burdens include extreme beliefs like “I am worthless” or “I am unlovable”; extreme bodily sensations such as reexperiencing the effects of neglect or abuse; and intense feelings and emotions such as shame. Because burdens are often held in the body, this is where we begin with the unburdening process. Self asks the part where it notices the burden in or around its body. Once the part connects with where the burden is, Self asks the part if it is ready to release the burden. Parts are usually eager to let go of their burdens. However, sometimes they are reluctant. In this case, the part may need additional time in witnessing, or Self can explore the fears the part has about releasing the burden. If the exile is ready to release their burdens, the Self can offer the release of the burdens to one of the elements: fire, water, air, earth, or any other way the part would like to release the burdens. It is important for the part to release the burden from where it’s located in the body. Self supports the part in releasing the burden by helping it set up the release to the elements or simply by being present during the unburdening. The burdens can be released together at one time or individually. It’s crucial to check with the exile to see if there’s more to unburden after each burden is released. Similar to witnessing, it is the part that determines when the unburdening is complete.	Освобождение – это процесс, посредством которого изгнанники освобождаются от своего бремени. Этот шаг имеет решающее значение для исцеления изгнанника. Бремя включает в себя крайние убеждения, такие как «Я никчемный» или «Я непривлекательный»; сильные телесные ощущения, такие как повторное переживание последствий пренебрежения или жестокого обращения; и сильные чувства и эмоции, такие как стыд. Поскольку бремя часто удерживается в теле, именно здесь мы начинаем процесс разгрузки. «Я» спрашивает ту часть, где оно замечает бремя внутри или вокруг своего тела. Как только часть соединяется с местом, где находится бремя, «Я» спрашивает часть, готова ли она освободиться от бремени. Части обычно стремятся освободиться от своего бремени. Однако иногда они сопротивляются. В этом случае части может потребоваться дополнительное время для свидетельствования, или «Я» может исследовать страхи части по поводу освобождения от бремени. Если изгнанник готов освободиться от своего бремени, Высшее Я может предложить освобождение от бремени одному из элементов: огню, воде, воздуху, земле или любому другому способу, которым часть желает освободить бремя. Для этой части важно снять нагрузку с того места, где она находится в теле. «Я» поддерживает часть процесса освобождения от бремени, помогая ему освободить элементы или просто присутствуя во время освобождения от бремени. Бремя может быть снято одновременно или по отдельности. Крайне важно посоветоваться с изгнанником, чтобы узнать, есть ли еще что-нибудь, что можно облегчить после того, как каждое бремя будет снято. Подобно свидетельствованию, это та часть, которая определяет, когда освобождение от бремени будет завершено.	Unburdening is the process by which the exile releases their burdens. This step is crucial to the healing of the exile. Burdens include extreme beliefs like “I am worthless” or “I am unlovable”; extreme bodily sensations such as reexperiencing the effects of neglect or abuse; and intense feelings and emotions such as shame. Because burdens are often held in the body, this is where we begin with the unburdening process. Self asks the part where it notices the burden in or around its body. Once the part connects with where the burden is, Self asks the part if it is ready to release the burden. Parts are usually eager to let go of their burdens. However, sometimes they are reluctant. In this case, the part may need additional time in witnessing, or Self can explore the fears the part has about releasing the burden. If the exile is ready to release their burdens, the Self can offer the release of the burdens to one of the elements: fire, water, air, earth, or any other way the part would like to release the burdens. It is important for the part to release the burden from where it’s located in the body. Self supports the part in releasing the burden by helping it set up the release to the elements or simply by being present during the unburdening. The burdens can be released together at one time or individually. It’s crucial to check with the exile to see if there’s more to unburden after each burden is released. Similar to witnessing, it is the part that determines when the unburdening is complete.
When my nine-year-old exile expressed enthusiasm about the prospect of releasing her burdens, I asked her, “What are the burdens you’re ready to let go of?” She didn’t answer in words; instead, I had a felt sense of her desire to release feelings of unworthiness, aloneness, and abandonment, the belief that she was unlovable because if she was lovable people would have told her the truth, difficulty managing her emotions, chest pains of a broken heart, and disconnection from her intuition. Next, I asked her where she noticed these burdens in or around her body. In response, I felt heat in my solar plexus. I then inquired about how she would like to release her burdens by saying, “You can release them to fire, air, water, earth, or any other way you would like to release them.” She said she wanted to release them to water at the beach and watch them float away. Next, we were at the water’s edge on a beach, and I asked her to remove the burdens from her solar plexus and release them to the water. As she did this, I encouraged her to make sure she got it all. It took several minutes for her to empty the many burdens into the surf. We watched the waves take the burdens out toward the horizon until they disappeared.	When my nine-year-old exile expressed enthusiasm about the prospect of releasing her burdens, I asked her, “What are the burdens you’re ready to let go of?” She didn’t answer in words; instead, I had a felt sense of her desire to release feelings of unworthiness, aloneness, and abandonment, the belief that she was unlovable because if she was lovable people would have told her the truth, difficulty managing her emotions, chest pains of a broken heart, and disconnection from her intuition. Next, I asked her where she noticed these burdens in or around her body. In response, I felt heat in my solar plexus. I then inquired about how she would like to release her burdens by saying, “You can release them to fire, air, water, earth, or any other way you would like to release them.” She said she wanted to release them to water at the beach and watch them float away. Next, we were at the water’s edge on a beach, and I asked her to remove the burdens from her solar plexus and release them to the water. As she did this, I encouraged her to make sure she got it all. It took several minutes for her to empty the many burdens into the surf. We watched the waves take the burdens out toward the horizon until they disappeared.	Когда моя девятилетняя изгнанница выразила энтузиазм по поводу перспективы освободиться от своего бремени, я спросил ее: «Какое бремя вы готовы отпустить?» Она не ответила словами; вместо этого я почувствовал ее желание освободиться от чувства никчемности, одиночества и покинутости, веру в то, что она непривлекательна, потому что, если бы она была милой, люди сказали бы ей правду, трудности с управлением своими эмоциями, боли в груди от сломленного состояния. сердце и оторванность от интуиции. Затем я спросил ее, где она заметила эти обременения внутри или вокруг своего тела. В ответ я почувствовал жар в солнечном сплетении. Затем я спросил, как бы она хотела освободить свое бремя, сказав: «Вы можете отпустить его в огонь, воздух, воду, землю или любым другим способом, которым вы захотите освободить его». Она сказала, что хочет выпустить их в воду на пляже и посмотреть, как они уплывут. Далее мы были у кромки воды на пляже, и я попросил ее снять бремя с солнечного сплетения и спустить его в воду. Пока она это делала, я посоветовал ей убедиться, что она получила все это. Ей потребовалось несколько минут, чтобы выбросить множество бремен в прибой. Мы смотрели, как волны уносят бремя к горизонту, пока оно не исчезло.	When my nine-year-old exile expressed enthusiasm about the prospect of releasing her burdens, I asked her, “What are the burdens you’re ready to let go of?” She didn’t answer in words; instead, I had a felt sense of her desire to release feelings of unworthiness, aloneness, and abandonment, the belief that she was unlovable because if she was lovable people would have told her the truth, difficulty managing her emotions, chest pains of a broken heart, and disconnection from her intuition. Next, I asked her where she noticed these burdens in or around her body. In response, I felt heat in my solar plexus. I then inquired about how she would like to release her burdens by saying, “You can release them to fire, air, water, earth, or any other way you would like to release them.” She said she wanted to release them to water at the beach and watch them float away. Next, we were at the water’s edge on a beach, and I asked her to remove the burdens from her solar plexus and release them to the water. As she did this, I encouraged her to make sure she got it all. It took several minutes for her to empty the many burdens into the surf. We watched the waves take the burdens out toward the horizon until they disappeared.
IFS CONCEPT 6: INVITATION	IFS CONCEPT 6: INVITATION	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ 6 IFS: ПРИГЛАШЕНИЕ	IFS CONCEPT 6: INVITATION
When parts are burdened, they do not have access to their natural gifts. The invitation is a way to connect with their essential essence and positive qualities they need moving forward. The release of their burdens opens space for these qualities to exist within. Self encourages the newly unburdened part to invite in qualities it believes it will need in the future and to access their essential qualities that were obscured by the burdens they carried. It is quite common for parts to choose qualities of Self. Just as it was crucial that the part physically released the burdens from its body, it is equally important for the part to embody the qualities it selects. The part can use the elements—fire, air, water, and earth—or any other ritual to assist with embodiment of the qualities. Self is present with the part to offer support.	When parts are burdened, they do not have access to their natural gifts. The invitation is a way to connect with their essential essence and positive qualities they need moving forward. The release of their burdens opens space for these qualities to exist within. Self encourages the newly unburdened part to invite in qualities it believes it will need in the future and to access their essential qualities that were obscured by the burdens they carried. It is quite common for parts to choose qualities of Self. Just as it was crucial that the part physically released the burdens from its body, it is equally important for the part to embody the qualities it selects. The part can use the elements—fire, air, water, and earth—or any other ritual to assist with embodiment of the qualities. Self is present with the part to offer support.	Когда части обременены, они не имеют доступа к своим природным дарам. Приглашение — это способ проникнуться их основной сущностью и положительными качествами, которые им необходимы для продвижения вперед. Освобождение от бремени открывает пространство для существования этих качеств внутри. «Я» побуждает вновь освободившуюся часть проявить качества, которые, по ее мнению, потребуются ей в будущем, и получить доступ к их основным качествам, которые были затемнены бременем, которое они несли. Части часто выбирают качества Самости. Точно так же, как было крайне важно, чтобы часть физически освободила свое тело от бремени, не менее важно, чтобы часть воплощала те качества, которые она выбирает. Часть может использовать элементы — огонь, воздух, воду и землю — или любой другой ритуал, чтобы помочь воплотить качества. «Я» присутствует со своей частью, предлагающей поддержку.	When parts are burdened, they do not have access to their natural gifts. The invitation is a way to connect with their essential essence and positive qualities they need moving forward. The release of their burdens opens space for these qualities to exist within. Self encourages the newly unburdened part to invite in qualities it believes it will need in the future and to access their essential qualities that were obscured by the burdens they carried. It is quite common for parts to choose qualities of Self. Just as it was crucial that the part physically released the burdens from its body, it is equally important for the part to embody the qualities it selects. The part can use the elements—fire, air, water, and earth—or any other ritual to assist with embodiment of the qualities. Self is present with the part to offer support.
When Self asked my nine-year-old part what essential qualities she wanted to embody, she asserted, “Intuition!” She went on to explain that the experience of being lied to by the adults she trusted severed her connection with her sense of knowing. When asked if there were any other qualities she wished to embody, she tearfully answered, “My intuition was my greatest gift, and not trusting it was my greatest loss. If I can get it back, I will be whole. It is all I need.” When asked how she would like to embody intuition, she took a deep inhale and said, “With my breath,” and proceeded to breathe deeply. With each breath, intuition came into my body as well as hers and coursed through our bloodstreams, infusing every inch of our bodies with its energy, with most of it accumulating in our hearts. Self asked my younger self to check her body and see what she noticed. She said, “I feel calm and connected.”	When Self asked my nine-year-old part what essential qualities she wanted to embody, she asserted, “Intuition!” She went on to explain that the experience of being lied to by the adults she trusted severed her connection with her sense of knowing. When asked if there were any other qualities she wished to embody, she tearfully answered, “My intuition was my greatest gift, and not trusting it was my greatest loss. If I can get it back, I will be whole. It is all I need.” When asked how she would like to embody intuition, she took a deep inhale and said, “With my breath,” and proceeded to breathe deeply. With each breath, intuition came into my body as well as hers and coursed through our bloodstreams, infusing every inch of our bodies with its energy, with most of it accumulating in our hearts. Self asked my younger self to check her body and see what she noticed. She said, “I feel calm and connected.”	Когда Селф спросила мою девятилетнюю часть, какие основные качества она хотела бы воплотить, она ответила: «Интуиция!» Далее она объяснила, что опыт лжи со стороны взрослых, которым она доверяла, разорвал ее связь с чувством знания. Когда ее спросили, есть ли еще какие-то качества, которые она хотела бы воплотить, она со слезами на глазах ответила: «Моя интуиция была моим величайшим даром, и не доверять ей было моей величайшей потерей. Если я смогу вернуть его, я буду цел. Это все, что мне нужно». Когда ее спросили, как бы она хотела воплотить интуицию, она сделала глубокий вдох и сказала: «С помощью дыхания», а затем продолжила глубоко дышать. С каждым вздохом интуиция проникала в мое и ее тело и текла по нашим кровотокам, наполняя каждый дюйм наших тел своей энергией, причем большая часть ее накапливалась в наших сердцах. Селф попросил себя в молодости проверить ее тело и посмотреть, что она заметила. Она сказала: «Я чувствую себя спокойной и связанной».	When Self asked my nine-year-old part what essential qualities she wanted to embody, she asserted, “Intuition!” She went on to explain that the experience of being lied to by the adults she trusted severed her connection with her sense of knowing. When asked if there were any other qualities she wished to embody, she tearfully answered, “My intuition was my greatest gift, and not trusting it was my greatest loss. If I can get it back, I will be whole. It is all I need.” When asked how she would like to embody intuition, she took a deep inhale and said, “With my breath,” and proceeded to breathe deeply. With each breath, intuition came into my body as well as hers and coursed through our bloodstreams, infusing every inch of our bodies with its energy, with most of it accumulating in our hearts. Self asked my younger self to check her body and see what she noticed. She said, “I feel calm and connected.”
Case Vignette: Retrieving an Exile	Case Vignette: Retrieving an Exile	Краткое описание дела: возвращение изгнанника	Case Vignette: Retrieving an Exile
The case vignette that follows highlights the retrieval step of the healing process. Again, this step is not always needed. However, when an exiled part is stuck in the past or in a trauma scene, it is used to get them to a place safe enough to continue the healing work.	The case vignette that follows highlights the retrieval step of the healing process. Again, this step is not always needed. However, when an exiled part is stuck in the past or in a trauma scene, it is used to get them to a place safe enough to continue the healing work.	В приведенном ниже описании случая подчеркивается этап восстановления процесса исцеления. Опять же, этот шаг не всегда необходим. Однако, когда изгнанная часть застревает в прошлом или в месте травмы, ее используют, чтобы доставить ее в достаточно безопасное место для продолжения исцеляющей работы.	The case vignette that follows highlights the retrieval step of the healing process. Again, this step is not always needed. However, when an exiled part is stuck in the past or in a trauma scene, it is used to get them to a place safe enough to continue the healing work.
May is Caucasian, in her early 50s, and came to therapy after her decades-long difficulties with sexual penetration were determined to have no physical origins. In her intake she disclosed that she and her younger sister were sexually trafficked by her mother’s boyfriend. As a teacher with summers off, he offered to babysit them to help her mother save on childcare costs. During the summers when May was eight and nine, he sold her and her sister to grown men for sex.	May is Caucasian, in her early 50s, and came to therapy after her decades-long difficulties with sexual penetration were determined to have no physical origins. In her intake she disclosed that she and her younger sister were sexually trafficked by her mother’s boyfriend. As a teacher with summers off, he offered to babysit them to help her mother save on childcare costs. During the summers when May was eight and nine, he sold her and her sister to grown men for sex.	Мэй — европейка, ей около 50 лет, и она пришла на терапию после того, как было установлено, что ее многолетние трудности с половым проникновением не имеют физического происхождения. В своем приеме она рассказала, что ее и ее младшую сестру стал жертвой сексуальной эксплуатации парень ее матери. Будучи учителем с летними каникулами, он предложил присмотреть за ними, чтобы помочь ее матери сэкономить на расходах по уходу за детьми. Летом, когда Мэй было восемь и девять лет, он продавал ее и ее сестру взрослым мужчинам для секса.	May is Caucasian, in her early 50s, and came to therapy after her decades-long difficulties with sexual penetration were determined to have no physical origins. In her intake she disclosed that she and her younger sister were sexually trafficked by her mother’s boyfriend. As a teacher with summers off, he offered to babysit them to help her mother save on childcare costs. During the summers when May was eight and nine, he sold her and her sister to grown men for sex.
In this session, May established a Self-to-part relationship with an exiled part she called Ragdoll, who seemed to trust May’s Self. I asked May to ask Ragdoll if there’s anything she wants May to know about her.	In this session, May established a Self-to-part relationship with an exiled part she called Ragdoll, who seemed to trust May’s Self. I asked May to ask Ragdoll if there’s anything she wants May to know about her.	На этом сеансе Мэй установила отношения «Я-разделение» с изгнанной частью, которую она называла Рэгдолл, которая, казалось, доверяла Самости Мэй. Я попросил Мэй спросить Рэгдолл, хочет ли она, чтобы Мэй знала о ней что-нибудь.	In this session, May established a Self-to-part relationship with an exiled part she called Ragdoll, who seemed to trust May’s Self. I asked May to ask Ragdoll if there’s anything she wants May to know about her.
“Ragdoll, I’m here and you’re safe. What do you want to tell me about you?”	“Ragdoll, I’m here and you’re safe. What do you want to tell me about you?”	«Рэгдолл, я здесь, и ты в безопасности. Что ты хочешь мне рассказать о себе?»	“Ragdoll, I’m here and you’re safe. What do you want to tell me about you?”
May, in Ragdoll’s voice, says, “STOP, no, stop, don’t! They’re hurting me. I don’t want to. Nooooo!” May’s body trembles, and tears flow as she flails her arms at an unseen assailant.	May, in Ragdoll’s voice, says, “STOP, no, stop, don’t! They’re hurting me. I don’t want to. Nooooo!” May’s body trembles, and tears flow as she flails her arms at an unseen assailant.	Мэй голосом Рэгдолла говорит: «СТОП, нет, стоп, не надо! Они причиняют мне боль. Я не хочу. Неееееет!» Тело Мэй дрожит, и слезы текут, когда она размахивает руками в сторону невидимого нападавшего.	May, in Ragdoll’s voice, says, “STOP, no, stop, don’t! They’re hurting me. I don’t want to. Nooooo!” May’s body trembles, and tears flow as she flails her arms at an unseen assailant.
“May, are you there with Ragdoll?”	“May, are you there with Ragdoll?”	— Мэй, ты здесь с Рэгдоллом?	“May, are you there with Ragdoll?”
“Yes, I am. I’m letting her know I’m here.”	“Yes, I am. I’m letting her know I’m here.”	"Да, я. Я сообщаю ей, что я здесь.	“Yes, I am. I’m letting her know I’m here.”
“Does she know you’re there?”	“Does she know you’re there?”	— Она знает, что ты здесь?	“Does she know you’re there?”
May lets out a muffled scream as if her mouth is covered.	May lets out a muffled scream as if her mouth is covered.	Мэй издает приглушенный крик, как будто ее рот закрыт.	May lets out a muffled scream as if her mouth is covered.
“See if Ragdoll can pull herself away from you a bit,” I suggest, realizing Ragdoll is blending somewhat with May.	“See if Ragdoll can pull herself away from you a bit,” I suggest, realizing Ragdoll is blending somewhat with May.	«Посмотри, сможет ли Рэгдолл немного оторваться от тебя», — предлагаю я, понимая, что Рэгдолл в чем-то сливается с Мэй.	“See if Ragdoll can pull herself away from you a bit,” I suggest, realizing Ragdoll is blending somewhat with May.
“Ragdoll, I want to be with you. Can you give me a little space?”	“Ragdoll, I want to be with you. Can you give me a little space?”	«Рэгдолл, я хочу быть с тобой. Можешь дать мне немного места?»	“Ragdoll, I want to be with you. Can you give me a little space?”
Ragdoll responds by shaking her head, still fighting, and says, “Make them stop touching me.”	Ragdoll responds by shaking her head, still fighting, and says, “Make them stop touching me.”	Рэгдолл в ответ качает головой, все еще борясь, и говорит: «Заставь их перестать меня трогать».	Ragdoll responds by shaking her head, still fighting, and says, “Make them stop touching me.”
“May, ask Ragdoll if there’s someplace safe she wants to go. Let her know she can leave there,” I share with hopes of getting Ragdoll out of the trauma scene.	“May, ask Ragdoll if there’s someplace safe she wants to go. Let her know she can leave there,” I share with hopes of getting Ragdoll out of the trauma scene.	— Мэй, спроси Рэгдолл, есть ли какое-нибудь безопасное место, куда она хочет пойти. Дайте ей знать, что она может уйти оттуда», — делюсь я с надеждой вытащить Рэгдолла из места травмы.	“May, ask Ragdoll if there’s someplace safe she wants to go. Let her know she can leave there,” I share with hopes of getting Ragdoll out of the trauma scene.
“Ragdoll, you don’t have to be there,” May says. You can go someplace safe, anyplace. You can come here with me. Where would you like to go?”	“Ragdoll, you don’t have to be there,” May says. You can go someplace safe, anyplace. You can come here with me. Where would you like to go?”	«Рэгдолл, тебе не обязательно там быть», — говорит Мэй. Вы можете пойти в безопасное место, куда угодно. Ты можешь пойти сюда со мной. Куда бы ты хотел поехать?»	“Ragdoll, you don’t have to be there,” May says. You can go someplace safe, anyplace. You can come here with me. Where would you like to go?”
In a whisper, as if to keep others from hearing her, she says to May, “I want to be with you.”	In a whisper, as if to keep others from hearing her, she says to May, “I want to be with you.”	Шепотом, словно для того, чтобы другие не услышали ее, она говорит Мэй: «Я хочу быть с тобой».	In a whisper, as if to keep others from hearing her, she says to May, “I want to be with you.”
“Great,” I say. “May, can you help her to come be with you?”	“Great,” I say. “May, can you help her to come be with you?”	«Отлично», — говорю я. — Мэй, ты можешь помочь ей поехать с тобой?	“Great,” I say. “May, can you help her to come be with you?”
May is quiet being with Ragdoll internally, then says, “She says she wants to leave but can’t.”	May is quiet being with Ragdoll internally, then says, “She says she wants to leave but can’t.”	Мэй тихо общается с Рэгдоллом, а затем говорит: «Она говорит, что хочет уйти, но не может».	May is quiet being with Ragdoll internally, then says, “She says she wants to leave but can’t.”
“Are you curious why she doesn’t want to leave May?”	“Are you curious why she doesn’t want to leave May?”	«Тебе интересно, почему она не хочет покидать Мэй?»	“Are you curious why she doesn’t want to leave May?”
“Yes.”	“Yes.”	"Да."	“Yes.”
“Then ask her why she can’t leave.”	“Then ask her why she can’t leave.”	— Тогда спроси ее, почему она не может уйти.	“Then ask her why she can’t leave.”
May gets quiet again and quickly responds, “Her little sister is in the other room and she won’t leave without her.”	May gets quiet again and quickly responds, “Her little sister is in the other room and she won’t leave without her.”	Мэй снова замолкает и быстро отвечает: «Ее младшая сестра в другой комнате, и она не уйдет без нее».	May gets quiet again and quickly responds, “Her little sister is in the other room and she won’t leave without her.”
“Okay, May, that makes sense. You may have to go into the scene with Ragdoll to help get her sister. Check if she’s open to that.”	“Okay, May, that makes sense. You may have to go into the scene with Ragdoll to help get her sister. Check if she’s open to that.”	— Хорошо, Мэй, это имеет смысл. Возможно, вам придется пойти на сцену с Рэгдолл, чтобы помочь заполучить ее сестру. Проверьте, открыта ли она для этого.	“Okay, May, that makes sense. You may have to go into the scene with Ragdoll to help get her sister. Check if she’s open to that.”
“She is.” After a moment of silence, May says, “I’ve got Ragdoll and she’s taking me to her sister.” Tears are streaming down May’s face as she reports what’s happening. “I’ve got her sister now. They’re both safely with me, curled up in my lap. I’m letting them know they’re safe with me and never have to go back there.”	“She is.” After a moment of silence, May says, “I’ve got Ragdoll and she’s taking me to her sister.” Tears are streaming down May’s face as she reports what’s happening. “I’ve got her sister now. They’re both safely with me, curled up in my lap. I’m letting them know they’re safe with me and never have to go back there.”	"Она." После минуты молчания Мэй говорит: «У меня есть Рэгдолл, и она везет меня к своей сестре». Слёзы текут по лицу Мэй, когда она рассказывает о том, что происходит. «Теперь у меня есть ее сестра. Они оба в безопасности со мной, свернувшись калачиком у меня на коленях. Я даю им понять, что со мной они в безопасности и им никогда не придется туда возвращаться».	“She is.” After a moment of silence, May says, “I’ve got Ragdoll and she’s taking me to her sister.” Tears are streaming down May’s face as she reports what’s happening. “I’ve got her sister now. They’re both safely with me, curled up in my lap. I’m letting them know they’re safe with me and never have to go back there.”
“Good. Hold them like that for as long as they need it.”	“Good. Hold them like that for as long as they need it.”	"Хороший. Держите их так до тех пор, пока они в этом нуждаются.	“Good. Hold them like that for as long as they need it.”
After Ragdoll and her sister were retrieved, Ragdoll felt safe enough to share her experiences through witnessing. She was incapable of doing so while she was stuck in the scene of her trauma, actively experiencing the abuse. Just as in the external world, safety has to be addressed from the inside first.	After Ragdoll and her sister were retrieved, Ragdoll felt safe enough to share her experiences through witnessing. She was incapable of doing so while she was stuck in the scene of her trauma, actively experiencing the abuse. Just as in the external world, safety has to be addressed from the inside first.	После того, как Рэгдолл и ее сестра были найдены, Рэгдолл почувствовала себя в достаточной безопасности, чтобы поделиться своим опытом через свидетельство. Она была неспособна сделать это, пока застряла на месте травмы и активно переживала насилие. Как и во внешнем мире, безопасность должна решаться в первую очередь изнутри.	After Ragdoll and her sister were retrieved, Ragdoll felt safe enough to share her experiences through witnessing. She was incapable of doing so while she was stuck in the scene of her trauma, actively experiencing the abuse. Just as in the external world, safety has to be addressed from the inside first.
Meditation: Elemental Healing	Meditation: Elemental Healing	Медитация: исцеление стихиями	Meditation: Elemental Healing
The Elemental Healing meditation is the second given to me by my ancestors.	The Elemental Healing meditation is the second given to me by my ancestors.	Медитация «Исцеление стихий» — вторая, данная мне моими предками.	The Elemental Healing meditation is the second given to me by my ancestors.
This meditation allows you to meet an Ancestor Guide and, with their support, release a belief, behavior, thought, or feeling that no longer serves you.	This meditation allows you to meet an Ancestor Guide and, with their support, release a belief, behavior, thought, or feeling that no longer serves you.	Эта медитация позволяет вам встретиться с Предком-Наставником и с его поддержкой освободиться от убеждения, поведения, мысли или чувства, которые больше не служат вам.	This meditation allows you to meet an Ancestor Guide and, with their support, release a belief, behavior, thought, or feeling that no longer serves you.
Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Закройте глаза или смягчите взгляд.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.
Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.	Перенесите свое осознание на свое дыхание и просто дышите.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe.
As you go inside, notice how your breath travels through your body, nourishing every place it touches.	As you go inside, notice how your breath travels through your body, nourishing every place it touches.	Зайдя внутрь, обратите внимание, как ваше дыхание проходит через ваше тело, питая каждое место, которого оно касается.	As you go inside, notice how your breath travels through your body, nourishing every place it touches.
Envision yourself near a body of water at sunrise.	Envision yourself near a body of water at sunrise.	Представьте себя возле водоема на рассвете.	Envision yourself near a body of water at sunrise.
It could be a beach, river, lake, stream, or any other body of water.	It could be a beach, river, lake, stream, or any other body of water.	Это может быть пляж, река, озеро, ручей или любой другой водоем.	It could be a beach, river, lake, stream, or any other body of water.
Notice that the sun is just over the horizon, and you marvel at the colors dancing in the sky.	Notice that the sun is just over the horizon, and you marvel at the colors dancing in the sky.	Обратите внимание, что солнце находится прямо за горизонтом, и вы восхищаетесь цветами, танцующими в небе.	Notice that the sun is just over the horizon, and you marvel at the colors dancing in the sky.
You start walking the shore, and in the distance you see a robed figure walking toward you.	You start walking the shore, and in the distance you see a robed figure walking toward you.	Вы начинаете идти по берегу и вдалеке видите идущую к вам фигуру в мантии.	You start walking the shore, and in the distance you see a robed figure walking toward you.
A calmness embraces you as you get closer and see a serene smile on the other’s face.	A calmness embraces you as you get closer and see a serene smile on the other’s face.	Спокойствие охватывает вас, когда вы подходите ближе и видите безмятежную улыбку на лице другого.	A calmness embraces you as you get closer and see a serene smile on the other’s face.
You recognize them as a wise and benevolent Ancestor Guide.	You recognize them as a wise and benevolent Ancestor Guide.	Вы узнаете в них мудрого и доброжелательного Проводника Предков.	You recognize them as a wise and benevolent Ancestor Guide.
The Ancestor Guide says, “I’ve come to help you release something that no longer serves you.”	The Ancestor Guide says, “I’ve come to help you release something that no longer serves you.”	В «Руководстве предков» говорится: «Я пришел помочь вам освободить то, что больше вам не служит».	The Ancestor Guide says, “I’ve come to help you release something that no longer serves you.”
They go on to say, “I’d like you to consider a belief, behavior, feeling, or thought that has outgrown its usefulness.”	They go on to say, “I’d like you to consider a belief, behavior, feeling, or thought that has outgrown its usefulness.”	Далее они говорят: «Я бы хотел, чтобы вы рассмотрели убеждение, поведение, чувство или мысль, которые переросли свою полезность».	They go on to say, “I’d like you to consider a belief, behavior, feeling, or thought that has outgrown its usefulness.”
Once you identify what no longer serves you, notice where you find it in or around your body.	Once you identify what no longer serves you, notice where you find it in or around your body.	Как только вы определите, что вам больше не служит, обратите внимание, где вы находите это внутри или вокруг своего тела.	Once you identify what no longer serves you, notice where you find it in or around your body.
Place your attention on what you notice there.	Place your attention on what you notice there.	Сосредоточьте свое внимание на том, что вы там заметили.	Place your attention on what you notice there.
The Ancestor Guide tells you absent this belief, behavior, feeling, or thought you can be your true Self. All you have to do is release it.	The Ancestor Guide tells you absent this belief, behavior, feeling, or thought you can be your true Self. All you have to do is release it.	«Руководство предков» говорит вам, что при отсутствии этой веры, поведения, чувств или мыслей вы можете быть своим истинным «Я». Все, что вам нужно сделать, это выпустить его.	The Ancestor Guide tells you absent this belief, behavior, feeling, or thought you can be your true Self. All you have to do is release it.
The Ancestor Guide walks with you to the water’s edge and says, “You can release it to this body of water. The Ancestor Guide digs a hole in the earth and says, “You can bury it in the Earth’s belly.” A bonfire appears, and the Ancestor Guide says, “You can allow the fire to consume it.” The Ancestor Guide then waves their arms and says, “You can release it on the wind.” They turn to you and ask, “In which way would you like to be free of what no longer serves you?”	The Ancestor Guide walks with you to the water’s edge and says, “You can release it to this body of water. The Ancestor Guide digs a hole in the earth and says, “You can bury it in the Earth’s belly.” A bonfire appears, and the Ancestor Guide says, “You can allow the fire to consume it.” The Ancestor Guide then waves their arms and says, “You can release it on the wind.” They turn to you and ask, “In which way would you like to be free of what no longer serves you?”	Проводник предков идет с вами к кромке воды и говорит: «Вы можете выпустить его в этот водоем. Путеводитель по предкам роет яму в земле и говорит: «Вы можете закопать ее в чреве Земли». Появляется костер, и Путеводитель предков говорит: «Вы можете позволить огню поглотить его». Затем Проводник Предков машет руками и говорит: «Вы можете выпустить его по ветру». Они обращаются к вам и спрашивают: «Как бы вы хотели освободиться от того, что вам больше не служит?»	The Ancestor Guide walks with you to the water’s edge and says, “You can release it to this body of water. The Ancestor Guide digs a hole in the earth and says, “You can bury it in the Earth’s belly.” A bonfire appears, and the Ancestor Guide says, “You can allow the fire to consume it.” The Ancestor Guide then waves their arms and says, “You can release it on the wind.” They turn to you and ask, “In which way would you like to be free of what no longer serves you?”
If you are not able to release it, let the Ancestor Guide know what you are afraid would happen if you released it. It is okay to spend time getting to know the parts of you that are afraid with the support of your Ancestor Guide.	If you are not able to release it, let the Ancestor Guide know what you are afraid would happen if you released it. It is okay to spend time getting to know the parts of you that are afraid with the support of your Ancestor Guide.	Если вы не можете его выпустить, сообщите «Руководству предков», чего вы опасаетесь, если вы его выпустите. Это нормально — потратить время на то, чтобы узнать те части себя, которые боятся, при поддержке вашего Наставника-предка.	If you are not able to release it, let the Ancestor Guide know what you are afraid would happen if you released it. It is okay to spend time getting to know the parts of you that are afraid with the support of your Ancestor Guide.
If you are ready to release it, the Ancestor Guide helps you in the way of your choosing.	If you are ready to release it, the Ancestor Guide helps you in the way of your choosing.	Если вы готовы выпустить его, «Руководство по предкам» поможет вам выбранным вами способом.	If you are ready to release it, the Ancestor Guide helps you in the way of your choosing.
After the release, take time to share with your Ancestor Guide what it feels like to release what is no longer useful.	After the release, take time to share with your Ancestor Guide what it feels like to release what is no longer useful.	После выпуска найдите время, чтобы рассказать своему Путеводителю по предкам, каково это — выпускать то, что больше не является полезным.	After the release, take time to share with your Ancestor Guide what it feels like to release what is no longer useful.
Take another minute to finish with your Ancestor Guide, knowing you can connect again whenever you like.	Take another minute to finish with your Ancestor Guide, knowing you can connect again whenever you like.	Потратьте еще минуту, чтобы закончить работу со своим Путеводителем по предкам, зная, что вы сможете снова подключиться, когда захотите.	Take another minute to finish with your Ancestor Guide, knowing you can connect again whenever you like.
When it feels right, bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	When it feels right, bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.	Когда вы почувствуете, что это правильно, сосредоточьте свое внимание на дыхании и просто дышите, возвращаясь в этот момент и пространство.	When it feels right, bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space.
Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Медленно откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: Elemental Healing Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Elemental Healing Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Вопросы для журнала «Элементальное исцеление»	Exercise 2: Elemental Healing Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Elemental Healing meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Elemental Healing meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили медитацию «Элементальное исцеление» и написали свой быстрый журнал, потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, ответив на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Elemental Healing meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
What did you identify that no longer serves you?	What did you identify that no longer serves you?	Что вы определили из того, что вам больше не служит?	What did you identify that no longer serves you?
What are the reasons it no longer serves you?	What are the reasons it no longer serves you?	По каким причинам он больше не служит вам?	What are the reasons it no longer serves you?
Were you able to release it?	Were you able to release it?	Удалось ли вам его выпустить?	Were you able to release it?
How might your life and relationships be impacted by this release?	How might your life and relationships be impacted by this release?	Как этот выпуск может повлиять на вашу жизнь и отношения?	How might your life and relationships be impacted by this release?
If you were not able to release it, why not?	If you were not able to release it, why not?	Если вы не смогли его выпустить, почему бы и нет?	If you were not able to release it, why not?
What were the fears you discovered?	What were the fears you discovered?	Какие страхи вы обнаружили?	What were the fears you discovered?
How might you address the fears?	How might you address the fears?	Как вы можете справиться со своими страхами?	How might you address the fears?
When you spent time with your Ancestor Guide, what did you learn?	When you spent time with your Ancestor Guide, what did you learn?	Чему вы научились, проводя время со своим Проводником-предком?	When you spent time with your Ancestor Guide, what did you learn?
CHAPTER 11	CHAPTER 11	ГЛАВА 11	CHAPTER 11
Cabin with the Ancestor	Cabin with the Ancestor	Хижина с Предком	Cabin with the Ancestor
Healing Family and Cultural Legacy Burdens	Healing Family and Cultural Legacy Burdens	Исцеление бремени семейного и культурного наследия	Healing Family and Cultural Legacy Burdens
Playa del Rey Elementary School, fifth grade, Mr. Dempsey’s class. I sit motionless as he places the graded science test face down on my desk. I’m too scared to turn it over and look at my score. I rationalize that I did my best. I studied hard. I reviewed my flashcards daily, even up to moments before taking the exam. I re-read the chapters covered and even did some of the experiments at home. But even with all the preparation, I had a sinking feeling that the grade at the top of this test would not be my customary A. It was important to me to get an A, and if it was a 100% A, that was better. A perfect score was my aim in school and everything else I did. I slowly turned the paper over to discover a large, red C.	Playa del Rey Elementary School, fifth grade, Mr. Dempsey’s class. I sit motionless as he places the graded science test face down on my desk. I’m too scared to turn it over and look at my score. I rationalize that I did my best. I studied hard. I reviewed my flashcards daily, even up to moments before taking the exam. I re-read the chapters covered and even did some of the experiments at home. But even with all the preparation, I had a sinking feeling that the grade at the top of this test would not be my customary A. It was important to me to get an A, and if it was a 100% A, that was better. A perfect score was my aim in school and everything else I did. I slowly turned the paper over to discover a large, red C.	Начальная школа Плайя-дель-Рей, пятый класс, класс мистера Демпси. Я сижу неподвижно, пока он кладет тест по естествознанию лицевой стороной вниз на мой стол. Я слишком напуган, чтобы перевернуть его и посмотреть на свой результат. Я объясняю это тем, что сделал все, что мог. Я усердно учился. Я просматривал свои карточки ежедневно, даже за несколько мгновений до сдачи экзамена. Я перечитал пройденные главы и даже провел некоторые эксперименты дома. Но даже несмотря на всю подготовку, у меня было неприятное ощущение, что оценка на вершине этого теста не будет моей обычной пятеркой. Для меня было важно получить пятерку, и если бы это была 100% пятерка, это было бы лучше. . Высшая оценка была моей целью в школе и во всем остальном, что я делал. Я медленно перевернул листок и обнаружил большую красную букву «С».	Playa del Rey Elementary School, fifth grade, Mr. Dempsey’s class. I sit motionless as he places the graded science test face down on my desk. I’m too scared to turn it over and look at my score. I rationalize that I did my best. I studied hard. I reviewed my flashcards daily, even up to moments before taking the exam. I re-read the chapters covered and even did some of the experiments at home. But even with all the preparation, I had a sinking feeling that the grade at the top of this test would not be my customary A. It was important to me to get an A, and if it was a 100% A, that was better. A perfect score was my aim in school and everything else I did. I slowly turned the paper over to discover a large, red C.
Fear gripped me as I studied the curve of the first C of my young academic career. Frozen, I thought, “How can I go home with such a disappointing grade?” I even considered how I could change the C to a B. Staring at the arch of the C, I quickly realized I could not alter it to a believable B. C is for crushed, how I felt being less than perfect.	Fear gripped me as I studied the curve of the first C of my young academic career. Frozen, I thought, “How can I go home with such a disappointing grade?” I even considered how I could change the C to a B. Staring at the arch of the C, I quickly realized I could not alter it to a believable B. C is for crushed, how I felt being less than perfect.	Страх охватил меня, когда я изучал кривую первой тройки моей молодой академической карьеры. Застыв, я подумал: «Как я могу пойти домой с такой неутешительной оценкой?» Я даже обдумывал, как можно изменить букву C на букву B. Глядя на дугу буквы C, я быстро понял, что не смогу изменить ее на правдоподобную букву B. C означает «раздавленный», и я чувствовал себя несовершенным.	Fear gripped me as I studied the curve of the first C of my young academic career. Frozen, I thought, “How can I go home with such a disappointing grade?” I even considered how I could change the C to a B. Staring at the arch of the C, I quickly realized I could not alter it to a believable B. C is for crushed, how I felt being less than perfect.
I grew up with a father who sought perfection at all costs. It was much more important to him how things looked than how they were. He modeled external perfection through his speech, dress, mannerisms, and his strong expression of right and wrong. We had to live in the right neighborhood, go to the right schools, join the right clubs. My siblings and I had to speak articulately, dress impeccably, possess manners beyond reproach, and demonstrate high intellect. But I was a tomboy who didn’t like bows and dresses, at times chewed with my mouth open, and said “ain’t” often. However, I was smart, and although my dad corrected and criticized me for the behaviors that were less than perfect, he praised me for my intellect. I worked hard to fit into his vision of me. I wanted to meet his expectations. I came to equate my dad’s love with the need to be perfect. Scared to present my science test to him, I walked the mile from school to home in record slow time.	I grew up with a father who sought perfection at all costs. It was much more important to him how things looked than how they were. He modeled external perfection through his speech, dress, mannerisms, and his strong expression of right and wrong. We had to live in the right neighborhood, go to the right schools, join the right clubs. My siblings and I had to speak articulately, dress impeccably, possess manners beyond reproach, and demonstrate high intellect. But I was a tomboy who didn’t like bows and dresses, at times chewed with my mouth open, and said “ain’t” often. However, I was smart, and although my dad corrected and criticized me for the behaviors that were less than perfect, he praised me for my intellect. I worked hard to fit into his vision of me. I wanted to meet his expectations. I came to equate my dad’s love with the need to be perfect. Scared to present my science test to him, I walked the mile from school to home in record slow time.	Я вырос с отцом, который стремился к совершенству любой ценой. Для него было гораздо важнее, как все выглядит, чем то, как оно есть. Он моделировал внешнее совершенство через свою речь, одежду, манеры и яркое выражение добра и зла. Нам нужно было жить в правильном районе, ходить в правильные школы, вступать в правильные клубы. Я и мои братья и сестры должны были красноречиво говорить, безупречно одеваться, обладать безупречными манерами и демонстрировать высокий интеллект. Но я был сорванцом, который не любил бантики и платья, временами жевал с открытым ртом и часто говорил «нет». Однако я был умным, и хотя мой отец поправлял и критиковал меня за несовершенное поведение, он хвалил меня за мой интеллект. Я много работал, чтобы соответствовать его видению меня. Я хотел оправдать его ожидания. Я стал приравнивать любовь отца к необходимости быть совершенным. Боясь представить ему свой тест по естествознанию, я прошел милю от школы до дома за рекордно медленное время.	I grew up with a father who sought perfection at all costs. It was much more important to him how things looked than how they were. He modeled external perfection through his speech, dress, mannerisms, and his strong expression of right and wrong. We had to live in the right neighborhood, go to the right schools, join the right clubs. My siblings and I had to speak articulately, dress impeccably, possess manners beyond reproach, and demonstrate high intellect. But I was a tomboy who didn’t like bows and dresses, at times chewed with my mouth open, and said “ain’t” often. However, I was smart, and although my dad corrected and criticized me for the behaviors that were less than perfect, he praised me for my intellect. I worked hard to fit into his vision of me. I wanted to meet his expectations. I came to equate my dad’s love with the need to be perfect. Scared to present my science test to him, I walked the mile from school to home in record slow time.
When I arrived, I found my dad in the living room waiting. He jokingly asked, “Let me see that A.” I cringed at the thought of showing him my test. I stammered in a low voice, “I-I-I didn’t get an A.” Disappointed, he replied, “Getting a B isn’t bad. Let me see it.” I was rooted in place as tears traced my face. When I was able to uproot myself, I slowly moved toward the couch where he sat and handed him the test. I could feel my insides shaking as I nervously waited for his response. The disdain on his face is forever imprinted in my memory, as well as the sting of his words: “I don’t have any average children.” In six words, my dad disowned me. I shut down in the shame that he no longer wanted me. I disconnected from the conversation, and only certain words penetrated my consciousness. I heard “unacceptable, unbelievable, disappointed.” Next, he pointed firmly to the stairs, demanding that I go to my room.	When I arrived, I found my dad in the living room waiting. He jokingly asked, “Let me see that A.” I cringed at the thought of showing him my test. I stammered in a low voice, “I-I-I didn’t get an A.” Disappointed, he replied, “Getting a B isn’t bad. Let me see it.” I was rooted in place as tears traced my face. When I was able to uproot myself, I slowly moved toward the couch where he sat and handed him the test. I could feel my insides shaking as I nervously waited for his response. The disdain on his face is forever imprinted in my memory, as well as the sting of his words: “I don’t have any average children.” In six words, my dad disowned me. I shut down in the shame that he no longer wanted me. I disconnected from the conversation, and only certain words penetrated my consciousness. I heard “unacceptable, unbelievable, disappointed.” Next, he pointed firmly to the stairs, demanding that I go to my room.	Когда я приехал, я обнаружил, что мой отец ждет меня в гостиной. Он в шутку спросил: «Дай мне посмотреть, что А». Я съежился при мысли о том, чтобы показать ему свой тест. Я пробормотал тихим голосом: «Я-я-я не получил пятёрку». Разочарованный, он ответил: «Получить четверку неплохо. Дай мне посмотреть. Я застыл на месте, а слезы текли по моему лицу. Когда мне удалось вырваться с корнем, я медленно подошел к дивану, на котором он сидел, и вручил ему тест. Я чувствовала, как мои внутренности трясутся, нервно ожидая его ответа. Презрение на его лице навсегда запечатлелось в моей памяти, как и острота его слов: «У меня нет обычных детей». В шести словах мой отец отрекся от меня. Я замолчала от стыда, что он больше не хотел меня. Я отключился от разговора, и лишь отдельные слова проникли в мое сознание. Я услышал «неприемлемо, невероятно, разочаровано». Затем он твердо указал на лестницу, требуя, чтобы я пошла в свою комнату.	When I arrived, I found my dad in the living room waiting. He jokingly asked, “Let me see that A.” I cringed at the thought of showing him my test. I stammered in a low voice, “I-I-I didn’t get an A.” Disappointed, he replied, “Getting a B isn’t bad. Let me see it.” I was rooted in place as tears traced my face. When I was able to uproot myself, I slowly moved toward the couch where he sat and handed him the test. I could feel my insides shaking as I nervously waited for his response. The disdain on his face is forever imprinted in my memory, as well as the sting of his words: “I don’t have any average children.” In six words, my dad disowned me. I shut down in the shame that he no longer wanted me. I disconnected from the conversation, and only certain words penetrated my consciousness. I heard “unacceptable, unbelievable, disappointed.” Next, he pointed firmly to the stairs, demanding that I go to my room.
I bawled on my bed inconsolably. When there were no more tears to cry, I started thinking of ways to prove to my dad that I was perfect and deserving. I imagined getting a perfect score on every test I would ever take. I promised myself that I would practice saying “isn’t” instead of “ain’t.” I would walk with perfect posture. I would be the model of perfection. The little girl my father could never disown again.	I bawled on my bed inconsolably. When there were no more tears to cry, I started thinking of ways to prove to my dad that I was perfect and deserving. I imagined getting a perfect score on every test I would ever take. I promised myself that I would practice saying “isn’t” instead of “ain’t.” I would walk with perfect posture. I would be the model of perfection. The little girl my father could never disown again.	Я безутешно рыдала на кровати. Когда слез больше не было, я начал думать о том, как доказать отцу, что я идеален и достоин. Я представлял себе, что получу высший балл на каждом тесте, который когда-либо сдавал. Я пообещал себе, что буду практиковаться говорить «нет» вместо «нет». Я ходил с идеальной осанкой. Я был бы образцом совершенства. Маленькая девочка, от которой мой отец больше никогда не сможет отречься.	I bawled on my bed inconsolably. When there were no more tears to cry, I started thinking of ways to prove to my dad that I was perfect and deserving. I imagined getting a perfect score on every test I would ever take. I promised myself that I would practice saying “isn’t” instead of “ain’t.” I would walk with perfect posture. I would be the model of perfection. The little girl my father could never disown again.
My plans of excellence were interrupted by light knocking on my door. I heard my mom say, “Tamala, can I come in?” as she slowly opened the door. My mom told me that she had spoken with my dad about my science test. When I heard this, I started to sob again. She held me and asked, “Did you do your best?” I answered that I did. She held my face and looked directly into my eyes and said, “Tamala, your best is always good enough. You can’t do better than your best, and sometimes your best is going to be a C, and that’s okay.” It felt good to hear this. But I was split; part of me felt redeemed, while another part could not let go of the need to pursue perfection.	My plans of excellence were interrupted by light knocking on my door. I heard my mom say, “Tamala, can I come in?” as she slowly opened the door. My mom told me that she had spoken with my dad about my science test. When I heard this, I started to sob again. She held me and asked, “Did you do your best?” I answered that I did. She held my face and looked directly into my eyes and said, “Tamala, your best is always good enough. You can’t do better than your best, and sometimes your best is going to be a C, and that’s okay.” It felt good to hear this. But I was split; part of me felt redeemed, while another part could not let go of the need to pursue perfection.	Мои планы совершенства были прерваны легким стуком в дверь. Я услышала, как мама сказала: «Тамала, можно мне войти?» когда она медленно открыла дверь. Моя мама сказала мне, что она говорила с моим отцом о моем тесте по естествознанию. Когда я услышал это, я снова начал рыдать. Она обняла меня и спросила: «Ты сделал все, что мог?» Я ответил, что да. Она взяла мое лицо, посмотрела прямо мне в глаза и сказала: «Тамала, твои лучшие качества всегда достаточно хороши. Вы не можете добиться большего, чем можете, а иногда ваш лучший результат будет на троечку, и это нормально». Было приятно это слышать. Но я был разделен; часть меня чувствовала себя искупленной, в то время как другая часть не могла избавиться от необходимости стремиться к совершенству.	My plans of excellence were interrupted by light knocking on my door. I heard my mom say, “Tamala, can I come in?” as she slowly opened the door. My mom told me that she had spoken with my dad about my science test. When I heard this, I started to sob again. She held me and asked, “Did you do your best?” I answered that I did. She held my face and looked directly into my eyes and said, “Tamala, your best is always good enough. You can’t do better than your best, and sometimes your best is going to be a C, and that’s okay.” It felt good to hear this. But I was split; part of me felt redeemed, while another part could not let go of the need to pursue perfection.
IFS CONCEPT 1: PERSONAL VS. LEGACY BURDENS	IFS CONCEPT 1: PERSONAL VS. LEGACY BURDENS	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: ЛИЧНОЕ VS. бремя наследия	IFS CONCEPT 1: PERSONAL VS. LEGACY BURDENS
As defined earlier, burdens are the extreme thoughts, beliefs, behaviors, emotions, and impulses parts take on because of trauma. Parts are not their burdens. The burden is how they have learned to cope with what happened to them. Parts are highly motivated to protect themselves, other parts, and the person from being hurt again. The pattern of protection becomes so entrenched that parts do not know any other way to operate within the system. A burden is a protective strategy that has outlived its usefulness.	As defined earlier, burdens are the extreme thoughts, beliefs, behaviors, emotions, and impulses parts take on because of trauma. Parts are not their burdens. The burden is how they have learned to cope with what happened to them. Parts are highly motivated to protect themselves, other parts, and the person from being hurt again. The pattern of protection becomes so entrenched that parts do not know any other way to operate within the system. A burden is a protective strategy that has outlived its usefulness.	Как было определено ранее, бремя — это крайние мысли, убеждения, поведение, эмоции и импульсы, которые части тела приобретают из-за травмы. Детали не являются их бременем. Бремя состоит в том, как они научились справляться с тем, что с ними произошло. Части очень мотивированы защищать себя, другие части и человека от повторных повреждений. Модель защиты становится настолько укоренившейся, что части не знают другого способа действовать внутри системы. Бремя — это защитная стратегия, изжившая свою полезность.	As defined earlier, burdens are the extreme thoughts, beliefs, behaviors, emotions, and impulses parts take on because of trauma. Parts are not their burdens. The burden is how they have learned to cope with what happened to them. Parts are highly motivated to protect themselves, other parts, and the person from being hurt again. The pattern of protection becomes so entrenched that parts do not know any other way to operate within the system. A burden is a protective strategy that has outlived its usefulness.
There are two types of burdens: personal and legacy. Personal burdens, as we discussed in Chapter 10, are burdens created through our direct lived experiences, while legacy burdens are defined as burdens inherited or passed down from the family, ethnic group, or culture. With legacy burdens the content of the original trauma is lost over time; however, the shame, lack of safety, and feelings of uncertainty, judgment, and being devalued are what’s passed down through the family lineage.1 Following are two case vignettes showing how the burden of anxiety can develop as a personal or legacy burden.	There are two types of burdens: personal and legacy. Personal burdens, as we discussed in Chapter 10, are burdens created through our direct lived experiences, while legacy burdens are defined as burdens inherited or passed down from the family, ethnic group, or culture. With legacy burdens the content of the original trauma is lost over time; however, the shame, lack of safety, and feelings of uncertainty, judgment, and being devalued are what’s passed down through the family lineage.1 Following are two case vignettes showing how the burden of anxiety can develop as a personal or legacy burden.	Существует два типа бремени: личное и наследственное. Личное бремя, как мы обсуждали в главе 10, — это бремя, созданное нашим непосредственным жизненным опытом, тогда как бремя наследия определяется как бремя, унаследованное или переданное от семьи, этнической группы или культуры. При бремени наследия содержание первоначальной травмы со временем теряется; однако стыд, отсутствие безопасности и чувство неуверенности, осуждения и обесценивания — это то, что передается по семейной линии.1 Ниже приведены два примера случаев, показывающих, как бремя тревоги может перерасти в личное или наследственное бремя.	There are two types of burdens: personal and legacy. Personal burdens, as we discussed in Chapter 10, are burdens created through our direct lived experiences, while legacy burdens are defined as burdens inherited or passed down from the family, ethnic group, or culture. With legacy burdens the content of the original trauma is lost over time; however, the shame, lack of safety, and feelings of uncertainty, judgment, and being devalued are what’s passed down through the family lineage.1 Following are two case vignettes showing how the burden of anxiety can develop as a personal or legacy burden.
Case Vignette 1:	Case Vignette 1:	Пример 1:	Case Vignette 1:
Anxiety as a Personal Burden	Anxiety as a Personal Burden	Тревога как личное бремя	Anxiety as a Personal Burden
Shyla’s family immigrated to the United States from India when she was four years old. Shyla was the oldest of three girls, with the youngest child having special medical needs that required a lot of her mother’s attention. Shyla’s father worked full-time as a university professor. She entered school not speaking English, which caused her a great deal of anxiety. For the first year of kindergarten, she rarely knew what was happening in her classroom. Her anxiety increased with the teasing she received from other children because she looked, dressed, and spoke differently. Eventually, Shyla internalized the teasing and her lack of understanding English as her being stupid and not good enough. Her nervousness escalated to somatic symptoms of stomachaches, headaches, and lack of appetite. These ailments kept her home from school for days at a time. They also kept Shyla safe from uncomfortable situations and feelings of inadequacy.	Shyla’s family immigrated to the United States from India when she was four years old. Shyla was the oldest of three girls, with the youngest child having special medical needs that required a lot of her mother’s attention. Shyla’s father worked full-time as a university professor. She entered school not speaking English, which caused her a great deal of anxiety. For the first year of kindergarten, she rarely knew what was happening in her classroom. Her anxiety increased with the teasing she received from other children because she looked, dressed, and spoke differently. Eventually, Shyla internalized the teasing and her lack of understanding English as her being stupid and not good enough. Her nervousness escalated to somatic symptoms of stomachaches, headaches, and lack of appetite. These ailments kept her home from school for days at a time. They also kept Shyla safe from uncomfortable situations and feelings of inadequacy.	Семья Шайлы иммигрировала в США из Индии, когда ей было четыре года. Шайла была старшей из трех девочек, а у младшего ребенка были особые медицинские потребности, которые требовали много внимания ее матери. Отец Шайлы работал профессором университета полный рабочий день. Она пошла в школу, не говоря по-английски, что вызывало у нее сильное беспокойство. В первый год детского сада она редко знала, что происходит в ее классе. Ее беспокойство усилилось из-за насмешек со стороны других детей, потому что она выглядела, одевалась и говорила по-другому. В конце концов, Шайла осознала, что поддразнивания и ее непонимание английского языка она глупая и недостаточно хорошая. Ее нервозность переросла в соматические симптомы: боли в животе, головные боли и отсутствие аппетита. Эти недуги не позволяли ей ходить в школу по несколько дней. Они также защищали Шайлу от неудобных ситуаций и чувства неполноценности.	Shyla’s family immigrated to the United States from India when she was four years old. Shyla was the oldest of three girls, with the youngest child having special medical needs that required a lot of her mother’s attention. Shyla’s father worked full-time as a university professor. She entered school not speaking English, which caused her a great deal of anxiety. For the first year of kindergarten, she rarely knew what was happening in her classroom. Her anxiety increased with the teasing she received from other children because she looked, dressed, and spoke differently. Eventually, Shyla internalized the teasing and her lack of understanding English as her being stupid and not good enough. Her nervousness escalated to somatic symptoms of stomachaches, headaches, and lack of appetite. These ailments kept her home from school for days at a time. They also kept Shyla safe from uncomfortable situations and feelings of inadequacy.
When I met Shyla in her early 30s, she suffered from debilitating migraine headaches; anxiety had negatively impacted every aspect of her life. She had disconnected from friends, she had quit her job because she was overwhelmed, her marriage was suffering, and she felt she was failing as a mother. The anxiety that began as protection from the uncertainties of her life as a young child had now taken on the extreme role of keeping her from fully engaging in life.	When I met Shyla in her early 30s, she suffered from debilitating migraine headaches; anxiety had negatively impacted every aspect of her life. She had disconnected from friends, she had quit her job because she was overwhelmed, her marriage was suffering, and she felt she was failing as a mother. The anxiety that began as protection from the uncertainties of her life as a young child had now taken on the extreme role of keeping her from fully engaging in life.	Когда я встретил Шайлу, когда ей было чуть больше 30, она страдала от изнурительных мигреней; тревога негативно повлияла на все аспекты ее жизни. Она оторвалась от друзей, ушла с работы, потому что была перегружена, ее брак страдал, и она чувствовала, что терпит неудачу как мать. Тревога, которая началась как защита от неопределенности ее жизни в детстве, теперь взяла на себя крайнюю роль, мешая ей полностью участвовать в жизни.	When I met Shyla in her early 30s, she suffered from debilitating migraine headaches; anxiety had negatively impacted every aspect of her life. She had disconnected from friends, she had quit her job because she was overwhelmed, her marriage was suffering, and she felt she was failing as a mother. The anxiety that began as protection from the uncertainties of her life as a young child had now taken on the extreme role of keeping her from fully engaging in life.
Shyla’s case is an example of anxiety as a personal burden. It developed out of her lived experiences. Parts took on anxiety to cope with what she could not control. Anxiety provided protection from challenging and uncomfortable situations as a child. However, over time, the parts went into overdrive and began protecting Shyla from what they perceived as having the potential of being difficult or causing harm. In this way the anxious parts kept Shyla from experiencing the deeper pain of not being enough.	Shyla’s case is an example of anxiety as a personal burden. It developed out of her lived experiences. Parts took on anxiety to cope with what she could not control. Anxiety provided protection from challenging and uncomfortable situations as a child. However, over time, the parts went into overdrive and began protecting Shyla from what they perceived as having the potential of being difficult or causing harm. In this way the anxious parts kept Shyla from experiencing the deeper pain of not being enough.	Случай Шайлы — пример тревоги как личного бремени. Это развилось из ее жизненного опыта. Партс взяла на себя тревогу, пытаясь справиться с тем, что она не могла контролировать. В детстве тревога защищала от сложных и некомфортных ситуаций. Однако со временем части перегрузились и начали защищать Шайлу от того, что, по их мнению, могло быть трудным или причинить вред. Таким образом, тревожные части не давали Шайле испытать более глубокую боль от того, что ее недостаточно.	Shyla’s case is an example of anxiety as a personal burden. It developed out of her lived experiences. Parts took on anxiety to cope with what she could not control. Anxiety provided protection from challenging and uncomfortable situations as a child. However, over time, the parts went into overdrive and began protecting Shyla from what they perceived as having the potential of being difficult or causing harm. In this way the anxious parts kept Shyla from experiencing the deeper pain of not being enough.
Case Vignette 2:	Case Vignette 2:	Пример случая 2:	Case Vignette 2:
Anxiety as a Legacy Burden	Anxiety as a Legacy Burden	Тревога как унаследованное бремя	Anxiety as a Legacy Burden
The client, a 42-year-old single Black female named Annamarie, presented with extreme anxiety about finances. She questioned every financial decision she made. She worried about not having enough money to take care of her basic needs. She stressed about her business failing and becoming homeless. She felt shame around spending money and buying nice things, although she could afford them. She expressed concern about whether she was saving enough of her income “for a rainy day.” She feared a financial future that was not reflective of her current financial situation.	The client, a 42-year-old single Black female named Annamarie, presented with extreme anxiety about finances. She questioned every financial decision she made. She worried about not having enough money to take care of her basic needs. She stressed about her business failing and becoming homeless. She felt shame around spending money and buying nice things, although she could afford them. She expressed concern about whether she was saving enough of her income “for a rainy day.” She feared a financial future that was not reflective of her current financial situation.	Клиентка, 42-летняя одинокая чернокожая женщина по имени Аннамари, выразила крайнее беспокойство по поводу финансов. Она подвергала сомнению каждое принятое ею финансовое решение. Она беспокоилась о том, что у нее не будет достаточно денег, чтобы позаботиться о своих основных потребностях. Она подчеркнула, что ее бизнес рухнул и она стала бездомной. Ей было стыдно тратить деньги и покупать хорошие вещи, хотя она могла себе это позволить. Она выразила обеспокоенность по поводу того, достаточно ли она откладывает своего дохода «на черный день». Она боялась, что финансовое будущее не будет отражать ее нынешнее финансовое положение.	The client, a 42-year-old single Black female named Annamarie, presented with extreme anxiety about finances. She questioned every financial decision she made. She worried about not having enough money to take care of her basic needs. She stressed about her business failing and becoming homeless. She felt shame around spending money and buying nice things, although she could afford them. She expressed concern about whether she was saving enough of her income “for a rainy day.” She feared a financial future that was not reflective of her current financial situation.
Annamarie lived in an upper-middle-class neighborhood. She lived well within her means, saving over 50 percent of what she earned. But she still ruminated about losing her high-six-figure income as an online entrepreneur. As I learned more about Annamarie and saw how her worries were inconsistent with her current experiences, I became curious about her childhood as it related to money. Interestingly, she grew up in a middle-class family, attended private school, and didn’t experience any financial hardships growing up. However, this line of questioning helped Annamarie remember her mother’s constant worry about money and not wanting to spend it even though the family could afford it. Annamarie shared how she asked her mother for name-brand shoes or clothing and her mother scolded her, saying, “You should be ashamed of yourself for being so greedy and ungrateful” or “I can’t believe you are this unappreciative.” Annamarie shared that these conversations left her feeling unworthy and undeserving, as she knew they could afford what she was asking for.	Annamarie lived in an upper-middle-class neighborhood. She lived well within her means, saving over 50 percent of what she earned. But she still ruminated about losing her high-six-figure income as an online entrepreneur. As I learned more about Annamarie and saw how her worries were inconsistent with her current experiences, I became curious about her childhood as it related to money. Interestingly, she grew up in a middle-class family, attended private school, and didn’t experience any financial hardships growing up. However, this line of questioning helped Annamarie remember her mother’s constant worry about money and not wanting to spend it even though the family could afford it. Annamarie shared how she asked her mother for name-brand shoes or clothing and her mother scolded her, saying, “You should be ashamed of yourself for being so greedy and ungrateful” or “I can’t believe you are this unappreciative.” Annamarie shared that these conversations left her feeling unworthy and undeserving, as she knew they could afford what she was asking for.	Аннамари жила в районе, где жили представители высшего среднего класса. Она жила по средствам, откладывая более 50 процентов того, что зарабатывала. Но она все еще размышляла о потере своего шестизначного дохода от онлайн-предпринимательства. Когда я узнал больше об Аннамари и увидел, насколько ее тревоги несовместимы с ее нынешним опытом, мне стало интересно узнать о ее детстве, связанном с деньгами. Интересно, что она выросла в семье среднего достатка, посещала частную школу и не испытывала в детстве никаких финансовых трудностей. Однако этот ряд вопросов помог Аннамари вспомнить постоянное беспокойство ее матери по поводу денег и нежелание их тратить, хотя семья могла себе это позволить. Анна-Мари рассказала, как она просила у матери обувь или одежду известных брендов, а мать отругала ее, сказав: «Тебе должно быть стыдно за то, что ты такая жадная и неблагодарная» или «Я не могу поверить, что ты настолько неблагодарна». Аннамари рассказала, что эти разговоры заставляли ее чувствовать себя недостойной и незаслуженной, поскольку она знала, что они могут позволить себе то, о чем она просит.	Annamarie lived in an upper-middle-class neighborhood. She lived well within her means, saving over 50 percent of what she earned. But she still ruminated about losing her high-six-figure income as an online entrepreneur. As I learned more about Annamarie and saw how her worries were inconsistent with her current experiences, I became curious about her childhood as it related to money. Interestingly, she grew up in a middle-class family, attended private school, and didn’t experience any financial hardships growing up. However, this line of questioning helped Annamarie remember her mother’s constant worry about money and not wanting to spend it even though the family could afford it. Annamarie shared how she asked her mother for name-brand shoes or clothing and her mother scolded her, saying, “You should be ashamed of yourself for being so greedy and ungrateful” or “I can’t believe you are this unappreciative.” Annamarie shared that these conversations left her feeling unworthy and undeserving, as she knew they could afford what she was asking for.
Annamarie’s mother had had a very different experience. She was raised by a widowed mother who struggled financially after the death of her husband left her raising five children alone. Annamarie’s mother, the youngest of the five, didn’t remember the prosperous times when her father was alive. Her memories were of struggle with barely enough to eat, bill collectors calling and coming to the house, her mother’s exhaustion from working several jobs, and her never-ending money woes. So she impressed upon Annamarie the importance of saving instead of spending. She would say, “Annamarie, life can turn on a dime, and then where would you be?”	Annamarie’s mother had had a very different experience. She was raised by a widowed mother who struggled financially after the death of her husband left her raising five children alone. Annamarie’s mother, the youngest of the five, didn’t remember the prosperous times when her father was alive. Her memories were of struggle with barely enough to eat, bill collectors calling and coming to the house, her mother’s exhaustion from working several jobs, and her never-ending money woes. So she impressed upon Annamarie the importance of saving instead of spending. She would say, “Annamarie, life can turn on a dime, and then where would you be?”	У матери Аннамари был совсем другой опыт. Ее воспитывала овдовевшая мать, которая испытывала финансовые трудности после того, как смерть мужа оставила ее одной воспитывать пятерых детей. Мать Аннамари, самая младшая из пятерых, не помнила благополучных времен, когда был жив ее отец. Ее воспоминания были о том, как ей едва хватало на еду, о звонках и приходах в дом инкассаторов, об усталости ее матери от работы на нескольких работах и ​​о ее бесконечных финансовых проблемах. Поэтому она убедила Аннамари, что важно экономить, а не тратить. Она говорила: «Анна-Мари, жизнь может перевернуться на глазах, и где бы тогда была ты?»	Annamarie’s mother had had a very different experience. She was raised by a widowed mother who struggled financially after the death of her husband left her raising five children alone. Annamarie’s mother, the youngest of the five, didn’t remember the prosperous times when her father was alive. Her memories were of struggle with barely enough to eat, bill collectors calling and coming to the house, her mother’s exhaustion from working several jobs, and her never-ending money woes. So she impressed upon Annamarie the importance of saving instead of spending. She would say, “Annamarie, life can turn on a dime, and then where would you be?”
As Annamarie learned more about her parts, her compassion grew, and she realized that she responded to her vulnerable exiled part who felt unworthy the same way her mother responded to her requests for nice things. She doused the intensive feelings of unworthiness with harsh words of criticism.	As Annamarie learned more about her parts, her compassion grew, and she realized that she responded to her vulnerable exiled part who felt unworthy the same way her mother responded to her requests for nice things. She doused the intensive feelings of unworthiness with harsh words of criticism.	По мере того, как Аннамари узнавала больше о своих частях, ее сострадание росло, и она поняла, что ответила своей уязвимой изгнанной части, которая чувствовала себя недостойной, так же, как ее мать ответила на ее просьбы о приятных вещах. Она заглушила острое чувство своей никчемности резкими словами критики.	As Annamarie learned more about her parts, her compassion grew, and she realized that she responded to her vulnerable exiled part who felt unworthy the same way her mother responded to her requests for nice things. She doused the intensive feelings of unworthiness with harsh words of criticism.
With the exploration of Annamarie’s family history and relationship to money, it became clear that her financial anxiety was a legacy burden. Annamarie had anxious parts about money, not because of her financial situation or her upbringing (personal burden) but because of the generational burden inherited from her mother and grandmother. And if it had been possible to speak with her grandmother, we might have discovered the legacy burden went further into the past.	With the exploration of Annamarie’s family history and relationship to money, it became clear that her financial anxiety was a legacy burden. Annamarie had anxious parts about money, not because of her financial situation or her upbringing (personal burden) but because of the generational burden inherited from her mother and grandmother. And if it had been possible to speak with her grandmother, we might have discovered the legacy burden went further into the past.	Изучив семейную историю Аннамари и ее отношение к деньгам, стало ясно, что ее финансовое беспокойство было унаследованным бременем. Аннамари беспокоилась о деньгах не из-за своего финансового положения или воспитания (личное бремя), а из-за бремени поколений, унаследованного от матери и бабушки. И если бы можно было поговорить с ее бабушкой, мы могли бы обнаружить, что бремя наследия ушло еще дальше в прошлое.	With the exploration of Annamarie’s family history and relationship to money, it became clear that her financial anxiety was a legacy burden. Annamarie had anxious parts about money, not because of her financial situation or her upbringing (personal burden) but because of the generational burden inherited from her mother and grandmother. And if it had been possible to speak with her grandmother, we might have discovered the legacy burden went further into the past.
As these two case examples demonstrate, personal and legacy burdens develop differently. However, the intention of the parts is the same: protection. With a personal burden, parts are protecting the system from previous pains experienced by the person. In the case of legacy burdens, the burdened parts are protecting the system from pains or traumas experienced within the generational line.	As these two case examples demonstrate, personal and legacy burdens develop differently. However, the intention of the parts is the same: protection. With a personal burden, parts are protecting the system from previous pains experienced by the person. In the case of legacy burdens, the burdened parts are protecting the system from pains or traumas experienced within the generational line.	Как показывают эти два примера, личное бремя и бремя наследия развиваются по-разному. Однако назначение частей одно и то же: защита. При личном бремени части защищают систему от предыдущих болей, пережитых человеком. В случае с наследственным бременем обремененные части защищают систему от болей и травм, переживаемых в рамках линии поколений.	As these two case examples demonstrate, personal and legacy burdens develop differently. However, the intention of the parts is the same: protection. With a personal burden, parts are protecting the system from previous pains experienced by the person. In the case of legacy burdens, the burdened parts are protecting the system from pains or traumas experienced within the generational line.
Which parts in the system carry legacy burdens—the managers, firefighters, or exiles? The answer is that any of these parts can inherit legacy burdens. Using Annamarie’s story, let’s see how this is possible.	Which parts in the system carry legacy burdens—the managers, firefighters, or exiles? The answer is that any of these parts can inherit legacy burdens. Using Annamarie’s story, let’s see how this is possible.	Какие части системы несут бремя наследия — менеджеры, пожарные или изгнанники? Ответ заключается в том, что любая из этих частей может унаследовать бремя наследия. Используя историю Аннамари, давайте посмотрим, как это возможно.	Which parts in the system carry legacy burdens—the managers, firefighters, or exiles? The answer is that any of these parts can inherit legacy burdens. Using Annamarie’s story, let’s see how this is possible.
Managers are burdened with responsibility and the need to control situations and outcomes. They vow to protect by not allowing the painful occurrence to happen again. Some of the ways managers accomplish their job are through people pleasing, criticizing, planning, caretaking, and overthinking. However, this list is not exhaustive. Firefighters are burdened with repressing the pain of the exile. When the system feels the pain (fire) of the exile, firefighters put out the flame with distraction. They may use sex, drugs, food, dissociation, and self-harm to not feel the overwhelming emotions of the exile. Again, this list does not include all the ways a firefighter responds to the emergence of the exile. Exiles are usually young, vulnerable parts who have been wounded by trauma. They may be frozen in the time of the trauma and use extreme behavior to tell their story. When they express themselves, the person feels exposed and vulnerable and may experience shame. These are the feelings managers and firefighters are trying to keep hidden. Exiles seek redemption from what or who hurt them or from people or situations like the original trauma. To this aim, they may express dependency, openness, sensitivity, and anger.	Managers are burdened with responsibility and the need to control situations and outcomes. They vow to protect by not allowing the painful occurrence to happen again. Some of the ways managers accomplish their job are through people pleasing, criticizing, planning, caretaking, and overthinking. However, this list is not exhaustive. Firefighters are burdened with repressing the pain of the exile. When the system feels the pain (fire) of the exile, firefighters put out the flame with distraction. They may use sex, drugs, food, dissociation, and self-harm to not feel the overwhelming emotions of the exile. Again, this list does not include all the ways a firefighter responds to the emergence of the exile. Exiles are usually young, vulnerable parts who have been wounded by trauma. They may be frozen in the time of the trauma and use extreme behavior to tell their story. When they express themselves, the person feels exposed and vulnerable and may experience shame. These are the feelings managers and firefighters are trying to keep hidden. Exiles seek redemption from what or who hurt them or from people or situations like the original trauma. To this aim, they may express dependency, openness, sensitivity, and anger.	Менеджеры обременены ответственностью и необходимостью контролировать ситуации и результаты. Они клянутся защитить, не позволяя болезненному происшествию повториться. Некоторые из способов, с помощью которых менеджеры выполняют свою работу, заключаются в том, чтобы угождать людям, критиковать их, планировать, заботиться и много думать. Однако этот список не является исчерпывающим. Пожарные обременены подавлением боли изгнанника. Когда система чувствует боль (пожар) изгнанника, пожарные отвлекают пламя. Они могут использовать секс, наркотики, еду, диссоциацию и членовредительство, чтобы не чувствовать подавляющих эмоций изгнанника. Опять же, в этот список не включены все способы реагирования пожарного на появление ссыльного. Изгнанники – это обычно молодые, уязвимые люди, получившие травмы. Они могут застыть во время травмы и использовать экстремальное поведение, чтобы рассказать свою историю. Когда они выражают себя, человек чувствует себя незащищенным и уязвимым и может испытывать стыд. Именно эти чувства менеджеры и пожарные пытаются скрыть. Изгнанники ищут искупления от того, что или кто причинил им боль, или от людей или ситуаций, подобных первоначальной травме. С этой целью они могут выражать зависимость, открытость, чувствительность и гнев.	Managers are burdened with responsibility and the need to control situations and outcomes. They vow to protect by not allowing the painful occurrence to happen again. Some of the ways managers accomplish their job are through people pleasing, criticizing, planning, caretaking, and overthinking. However, this list is not exhaustive. Firefighters are burdened with repressing the pain of the exile. When the system feels the pain (fire) of the exile, firefighters put out the flame with distraction. They may use sex, drugs, food, dissociation, and self-harm to not feel the overwhelming emotions of the exile. Again, this list does not include all the ways a firefighter responds to the emergence of the exile. Exiles are usually young, vulnerable parts who have been wounded by trauma. They may be frozen in the time of the trauma and use extreme behavior to tell their story. When they express themselves, the person feels exposed and vulnerable and may experience shame. These are the feelings managers and firefighters are trying to keep hidden. Exiles seek redemption from what or who hurt them or from people or situations like the original trauma. To this aim, they may express dependency, openness, sensitivity, and anger.
Annamarie had an anxious part that worried about financial ruin, even though she was financially solvent with a successful business. The part that worried and ruminated about money is a manager. It keeps her focused on unseen possible future events to keep her from experiencing the pain of her exile. The anxious, worried part is a manager carrying the legacy burden.	Annamarie had an anxious part that worried about financial ruin, even though she was financially solvent with a successful business. The part that worried and ruminated about money is a manager. It keeps her focused on unseen possible future events to keep her from experiencing the pain of her exile. The anxious, worried part is a manager carrying the legacy burden.	У Анна-Мари была тревожная часть, которая беспокоилась о финансовом крахе, хотя она была финансово платежеспособной и имела успешный бизнес. Та часть, которая беспокоится и размышляет о деньгах, — это менеджер. Это заставляет ее сосредоточиться на невидимых возможных будущих событиях, чтобы не дать ей испытать боль изгнания. Тревожная и обеспокоенная часть — это менеджер, несущий бремя наследия.	Annamarie had an anxious part that worried about financial ruin, even though she was financially solvent with a successful business. The part that worried and ruminated about money is a manager. It keeps her focused on unseen possible future events to keep her from experiencing the pain of her exile. The anxious, worried part is a manager carrying the legacy burden.
The part that felt unworthy and undeserving of her mother’s love is an exile. This part came to connect financial success and saving with love. The fear of financial ruin was intertwined with its overall sense of worth and being worthy of love. In working with this exiled part, we discovered that none of the unworthiness belonged to this part. All of it was a legacy burden, passed to Annamarie from her mother’s feelings of unworthiness and shame about her own childhood experiences related to being poor.	The part that felt unworthy and undeserving of her mother’s love is an exile. This part came to connect financial success and saving with love. The fear of financial ruin was intertwined with its overall sense of worth and being worthy of love. In working with this exiled part, we discovered that none of the unworthiness belonged to this part. All of it was a legacy burden, passed to Annamarie from her mother’s feelings of unworthiness and shame about her own childhood experiences related to being poor.	Та часть, которая чувствовала себя недостойной и недостойной материнской любви, — изгнанница. Эта часть призвана связать финансовый успех и экономию с любовью. Страх финансового краха был переплетен с общим чувством собственного достоинства и достойной любви. Работая с этой изгнанной частью, мы обнаружили, что ничто из недостойного не принадлежало этой части. Все это было бременем по наследству, перешедшим к Аннамари из-за чувства никчемности ее матери и стыда за собственный детский опыт, связанный с бедностью.	The part that felt unworthy and undeserving of her mother’s love is an exile. This part came to connect financial success and saving with love. The fear of financial ruin was intertwined with its overall sense of worth and being worthy of love. In working with this exiled part, we discovered that none of the unworthiness belonged to this part. All of it was a legacy burden, passed to Annamarie from her mother’s feelings of unworthiness and shame about her own childhood experiences related to being poor.
Annamarie also had a firefighter who carried a legacy burden. The firefighter responded with criticism when the exile expressed feelings of unworthiness. The harshness that Annamarie’s firefighter used to extinguish the intolerable feelings of unworthiness was inherited from her mother. Annamarie’s firefighter part wasn’t designed to be harsh but instead took on the harshness of her mother and used it to bring the system back into equilibrium when it was destabilized by the exile.	Annamarie also had a firefighter who carried a legacy burden. The firefighter responded with criticism when the exile expressed feelings of unworthiness. The harshness that Annamarie’s firefighter used to extinguish the intolerable feelings of unworthiness was inherited from her mother. Annamarie’s firefighter part wasn’t designed to be harsh but instead took on the harshness of her mother and used it to bring the system back into equilibrium when it was destabilized by the exile.	У Аннамари также был пожарный, несший бремя наследия. Пожарный ответил критикой, когда изгнанник выразил чувство своей никчемности. Жесткость, которую пожарный Аннамари использовал, чтобы погасить невыносимое чувство своей никчемности, была унаследована от ее матери. Роль пожарного Аннамари не была задумана как суровая, а вместо этого взяла на себя резкость ее матери и использовала ее, чтобы вернуть систему в равновесие, когда она была дестабилизирована изгнанием.	Annamarie also had a firefighter who carried a legacy burden. The firefighter responded with criticism when the exile expressed feelings of unworthiness. The harshness that Annamarie’s firefighter used to extinguish the intolerable feelings of unworthiness was inherited from her mother. Annamarie’s firefighter part wasn’t designed to be harsh but instead took on the harshness of her mother and used it to bring the system back into equilibrium when it was destabilized by the exile.
The case of Annamarie demonstrates how each type of part can be impacted by legacy burdens. Her manager carried the legacy burden of anxiety of financial ruin. Her firefighter responded to the expressed unworthiness of her exiled part with the legacy burden of harsh criticism. Lastly, her exile carried the legacy burden of unworthiness. Each of these legacy burdens was passed down on her maternal line from her mother’s and grandmother’s experiences and feelings connected to money.	The case of Annamarie demonstrates how each type of part can be impacted by legacy burdens. Her manager carried the legacy burden of anxiety of financial ruin. Her firefighter responded to the expressed unworthiness of her exiled part with the legacy burden of harsh criticism. Lastly, her exile carried the legacy burden of unworthiness. Each of these legacy burdens was passed down on her maternal line from her mother’s and grandmother’s experiences and feelings connected to money.	Случай Аннамари демонстрирует, как на каждый тип детали может повлиять бремя наследия. Ее менеджер нес на себе унаследованное бремя тревоги финансового краха. На высказанную недостойность ее сосланной части ее пожарный ответил наследственным бременем жесткой критики. Наконец, ее изгнание несло в себе бремя недостойности. Каждое из этих наследственных бремен передалось ей по материнской линии из опыта и чувств ее матери и бабушки, связанных с деньгами.	The case of Annamarie demonstrates how each type of part can be impacted by legacy burdens. Her manager carried the legacy burden of anxiety of financial ruin. Her firefighter responded to the expressed unworthiness of her exiled part with the legacy burden of harsh criticism. Lastly, her exile carried the legacy burden of unworthiness. Each of these legacy burdens was passed down on her maternal line from her mother’s and grandmother’s experiences and feelings connected to money.
Generational transmission is not limited to legacy burdens; legacy gifts are also inherited. Legacy gifts or heirlooms are inherent positive qualities passed down the generational line. This is evident in comments like “musical talent runs in the family” or “she has a calm presence like her great-grandmother.” Legacy gifts are not taught or learned but innately woven into the fabric of a family, similar to the biological disposition of height or hazel eyes. However, when a person is carrying a legacy burden, the gifts are obscured. The healing of the legacy burden allows for access to the legacy gifts of the line. The case vignette that follows highlights the transformation of a cultural legacy burden into legacy gifts.	Generational transmission is not limited to legacy burdens; legacy gifts are also inherited. Legacy gifts or heirlooms are inherent positive qualities passed down the generational line. This is evident in comments like “musical talent runs in the family” or “she has a calm presence like her great-grandmother.” Legacy gifts are not taught or learned but innately woven into the fabric of a family, similar to the biological disposition of height or hazel eyes. However, when a person is carrying a legacy burden, the gifts are obscured. The healing of the legacy burden allows for access to the legacy gifts of the line. The case vignette that follows highlights the transformation of a cultural legacy burden into legacy gifts.	Передача поколений не ограничивается бременем наследия; дары наследия также передаются по наследству. Наследственные подарки или семейные реликвии — это неотъемлемые положительные качества, передаваемые из поколения в поколение. Это очевидно в таких комментариях, как «музыкальный талант заложен в семье» или «у нее спокойная внешность, как у ее прабабушки». Дарам наследия не учат и не изучают, а вплетают в ткань семьи, подобно биологической предрасположенности к росту или карим глазам. Однако, когда человек несет бремя наследства, дары затемняются. Исцеление бремени наследия открывает доступ к дарам наследия линии. В приведенном ниже примере подчеркивается трансформация бремени культурного наследия в дары наследия.	Generational transmission is not limited to legacy burdens; legacy gifts are also inherited. Legacy gifts or heirlooms are inherent positive qualities passed down the generational line. This is evident in comments like “musical talent runs in the family” or “she has a calm presence like her great-grandmother.” Legacy gifts are not taught or learned but innately woven into the fabric of a family, similar to the biological disposition of height or hazel eyes. However, when a person is carrying a legacy burden, the gifts are obscured. The healing of the legacy burden allows for access to the legacy gifts of the line. The case vignette that follows highlights the transformation of a cultural legacy burden into legacy gifts.
IFS CONCEPT 2: CULTURAL LEGACY BURDENS	IFS CONCEPT 2: CULTURAL LEGACY BURDENS	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ 2 IFS: БРЕМЯ КУЛЬТУРНОГО НАСЛЕДИЯ	IFS CONCEPT 2: CULTURAL LEGACY BURDENS
The cultural legacy burdens of the United States defined in Internal Family Systems Therapy (second edition) are racism, patriarchy, individualism, and materialism. The foundation of the United States is built on stolen lands of Native Americans and the enslaved labor of stolen Africans. The founding of this country was based on the belief that Native Americans and Africans were inferior due to their race and therefore could be treated as less than a white person. Racism is oppression of a people based on race. Patriarchy is also traced to the beginning of our nation. The Founding Fathers are the white men instrumental in the forging of the United States. In our patriarchal society, power, control, and dominance are held by men. Individualism stresses self-reliance. As Richard Schwartz puts it, “Individualism fosters contempt for vulnerability and a belief that failure is a personal fault.” Materialism focuses on gaining, maintaining, and achieving higher status.2	The cultural legacy burdens of the United States defined in Internal Family Systems Therapy (second edition) are racism, patriarchy, individualism, and materialism. The foundation of the United States is built on stolen lands of Native Americans and the enslaved labor of stolen Africans. The founding of this country was based on the belief that Native Americans and Africans were inferior due to their race and therefore could be treated as less than a white person. Racism is oppression of a people based on race. Patriarchy is also traced to the beginning of our nation. The Founding Fathers are the white men instrumental in the forging of the United States. In our patriarchal society, power, control, and dominance are held by men. Individualism stresses self-reliance. As Richard Schwartz puts it, “Individualism fosters contempt for vulnerability and a belief that failure is a personal fault.” Materialism focuses on gaining, maintaining, and achieving higher status.2	Бремя культурного наследия Соединенных Штатов, определенное во внутренней семейной системной терапии (второе издание), - это расизм, патриархат, индивидуализм и материализм. Основа Соединенных Штатов построена на украденных землях коренных американцев и порабощенном труде украденных африканцев. Основание этой страны было основано на убеждении, что коренные американцы и африканцы являются неполноценными из-за своей расы и, следовательно, к ним можно относиться меньше, чем к белым людям. Расизм – это угнетение народа по расовому признаку. Патриархат также восходит к истокам нашей нации. Отцы-основатели — это белые люди, сыгравшие важную роль в создании Соединенных Штатов. В нашем патриархальном обществе власть, контроль и доминирование принадлежат мужчинам. Индивидуализм подчеркивает уверенность в своих силах. Как выразился Ричард Шварц: «Индивидуализм воспитывает презрение к уязвимости и веру в то, что неудача – это личная вина». Материализм фокусируется на получении, поддержании и достижении более высокого статуса.2	The cultural legacy burdens of the United States defined in Internal Family Systems Therapy (second edition) are racism, patriarchy, individualism, and materialism. The foundation of the United States is built on stolen lands of Native Americans and the enslaved labor of stolen Africans. The founding of this country was based on the belief that Native Americans and Africans were inferior due to their race and therefore could be treated as less than a white person. Racism is oppression of a people based on race. Patriarchy is also traced to the beginning of our nation. The Founding Fathers are the white men instrumental in the forging of the United States. In our patriarchal society, power, control, and dominance are held by men. Individualism stresses self-reliance. As Richard Schwartz puts it, “Individualism fosters contempt for vulnerability and a belief that failure is a personal fault.” Materialism focuses on gaining, maintaining, and achieving higher status.2
I see the impact of racism in my psychotherapy practice working with Black women. Many of my clients can be described as self-reliant and holding the Strong Black Woman legacy burden. This legacy burden is born out of the racist institution of enslaving African people. Writing in the psychology journal Sex Roles, researchers Martinque Jones, Keoshia Harris, and Akilah Reynolds describe the Strong Black Woman as emotionally restrained, independent, and a caretaker to others; they explain that that strength is viewed as psychological resistance to the prevalence of oppression in American society.3	I see the impact of racism in my psychotherapy practice working with Black women. Many of my clients can be described as self-reliant and holding the Strong Black Woman legacy burden. This legacy burden is born out of the racist institution of enslaving African people. Writing in the psychology journal Sex Roles, researchers Martinque Jones, Keoshia Harris, and Akilah Reynolds describe the Strong Black Woman as emotionally restrained, independent, and a caretaker to others; they explain that that strength is viewed as psychological resistance to the prevalence of oppression in American society.3	Я вижу влияние расизма в своей психотерапевтической практике, работая с чернокожими женщинами. Многих моих клиентов можно охарактеризовать как самостоятельных и несущих бремя наследия сильной чернокожей женщины. Это бремя наследия порождено расистским институтом порабощения африканского народа. В статье в психологическом журнале «Секс-роли» исследователи Мартинк Джонс, Кеошия Харрис и Акила Рейнольдс описывают сильную чернокожую женщину как эмоционально сдержанную, независимую и заботливую о других; они объясняют, что эта сила рассматривается как психологическое сопротивление распространению угнетения в американском обществе.3	I see the impact of racism in my psychotherapy practice working with Black women. Many of my clients can be described as self-reliant and holding the Strong Black Woman legacy burden. This legacy burden is born out of the racist institution of enslaving African people. Writing in the psychology journal Sex Roles, researchers Martinque Jones, Keoshia Harris, and Akilah Reynolds describe the Strong Black Woman as emotionally restrained, independent, and a caretaker to others; they explain that that strength is viewed as psychological resistance to the prevalence of oppression in American society.3
My clients have shared experiences of horrendous injustices, demeaning abuses of their bodies, and painful losses with disconnection and lack of emotion. They tell these stories as if they happened to someone else. They demonstrate the independence of the Strong Black Woman by not asking for help in overwhelming life situations and, furthermore, not even considering asking for help as an option. Clients have looked at me in disbelief when I ask them about seeking emotional or financial support or concrete aid. They meet my suggestion by insisting they’re capable of doing it themselves; people would think them weak and unable to handle their business if they sought help. Or they explain that they are the person family or friends come to for help. This last response, justifying going it alone, is also a quality of the Strong Black Woman; she is a caregiver who puts the needs and even the wants of others before herself.	My clients have shared experiences of horrendous injustices, demeaning abuses of their bodies, and painful losses with disconnection and lack of emotion. They tell these stories as if they happened to someone else. They demonstrate the independence of the Strong Black Woman by not asking for help in overwhelming life situations and, furthermore, not even considering asking for help as an option. Clients have looked at me in disbelief when I ask them about seeking emotional or financial support or concrete aid. They meet my suggestion by insisting they’re capable of doing it themselves; people would think them weak and unable to handle their business if they sought help. Or they explain that they are the person family or friends come to for help. This last response, justifying going it alone, is also a quality of the Strong Black Woman; she is a caregiver who puts the needs and even the wants of others before herself.	Мои клиенты поделились опытом ужасающей несправедливости, унизительного насилия над своим телом и болезненных потерь из-за отсутствия связи и отсутствия эмоций. Они рассказывают эти истории так, как будто они произошли с кем-то другим. Они демонстрируют независимость Сильной Черной Женщины тем, что не просят о помощи в сложных жизненных ситуациях и, более того, даже не рассматривают обращение за помощью как вариант. Клиенты смотрели на меня с недоверием, когда я спрашивал их об эмоциональной, финансовой поддержке или конкретной помощи. Они отвечают на мое предложение, утверждая, что способны сделать это сами; люди сочли бы их слабыми и неспособными справиться со своим бизнесом, если бы они обратились за помощью. Или они объясняют, что именно к ним приходят за помощью родственники или друзья. Этот последний ответ, оправдывающий действия в одиночку, также является качеством Сильной Черной Женщины; она опекун, который ставит нужды и даже желания других выше себя.	My clients have shared experiences of horrendous injustices, demeaning abuses of their bodies, and painful losses with disconnection and lack of emotion. They tell these stories as if they happened to someone else. They demonstrate the independence of the Strong Black Woman by not asking for help in overwhelming life situations and, furthermore, not even considering asking for help as an option. Clients have looked at me in disbelief when I ask them about seeking emotional or financial support or concrete aid. They meet my suggestion by insisting they’re capable of doing it themselves; people would think them weak and unable to handle their business if they sought help. Or they explain that they are the person family or friends come to for help. This last response, justifying going it alone, is also a quality of the Strong Black Woman; she is a caregiver who puts the needs and even the wants of others before herself.
In the book The Strong Black Woman, Marita Golden outlines the experiences of Black women in the United States that contributed to the Strong Black Woman legacy burden:	In the book The Strong Black Woman, Marita Golden outlines the experiences of Black women in the United States that contributed to the Strong Black Woman legacy burden:	В книге «Сильная чернокожая женщина» Марита Голден описывает опыт чернокожих женщин в Соединенных Штатах, который способствовал возникновению бремени наследия «Сильной чернокожей женщины»:	In the book The Strong Black Woman, Marita Golden outlines the experiences of Black women in the United States that contributed to the Strong Black Woman legacy burden:
The Strong Black Woman was forged in the stinking, squalid hole of a slave ship, on the auction block, in an enslaved woman’s ragged rush and run to freedom, nursing White babies instead of our own, when we were defined not really as “women,” not like White women were, when it was asserted by Whites that because we were enslaved women we couldn’t be “raped,” when we were forced to work from dawn to dusk, and carry and bear the weight, fainting in the grip of “the spirit” in a pew on Sunday morning, becoming against the odds “the first Negro woman to_____,” doing the grunt work of organizing behind the scenes for civil and human rights, training a White man who would take our job and then become our boss, standing shocked and silent at the news of the deaths of Trayvon Martin, Eric Garner, Sandra Bland, telling our daughters for the millionth time they have to be twice as good, basking in the acceptance and understanding of sister circles, where we are renewed, but where the cycle of adherence to the identity of the Strong Black Woman is also often reinforced.4	The Strong Black Woman was forged in the stinking, squalid hole of a slave ship, on the auction block, in an enslaved woman’s ragged rush and run to freedom, nursing White babies instead of our own, when we were defined not really as “women,” not like White women were, when it was asserted by Whites that because we were enslaved women we couldn’t be “raped,” when we were forced to work from dawn to dusk, and carry and bear the weight, fainting in the grip of “the spirit” in a pew on Sunday morning, becoming against the odds “the first Negro woman to_____,” doing the grunt work of organizing behind the scenes for civil and human rights, training a White man who would take our job and then become our boss, standing shocked and silent at the news of the deaths of Trayvon Martin, Eric Garner, Sandra Bland, telling our daughters for the millionth time they have to be twice as good, basking in the acceptance and understanding of sister circles, where we are renewed, but where the cycle of adherence to the identity of the Strong Black Woman is also often reinforced.4	«Сильная Черная Женщина» была выкована в вонючей, убогой дыре невольничьего корабля, на аукционной площадке, в отчаянном порыве порабощенной женщины, бегущей к свободе, вскормившей Белых младенцев вместо своих собственных, когда нас определяли не совсем как «женщин». В отличие от белых женщин, когда белые утверждали, что, поскольку мы были порабощенными женщинами, нас нельзя «изнасиловать», когда нас заставляли работать от рассвета до заката, носить и нести тяжесть, теряя сознание в хватку «духа» на скамье воскресным утром, становясь вопреки всему «первой негритянкой, которая_____», выполняя тяжелую работу по закулисной организации защиты гражданских прав и прав человека, обучая белого человека, который возьмет на себя нашу работу и затем станьте нашим боссом, стоящим в шоке и молчаливом известии о смерти Трейвона Мартина, Эрика Гарнера, Сандры Бланд, говорящим нашим дочерям в миллионный раз, что они должны быть вдвое лучше, купающимися в принятии и понимании сестринских кругов, где мы обновляемся, но где также часто усиливается цикл приверженности идентичности Сильной Черной Женщины.4	The Strong Black Woman was forged in the stinking, squalid hole of a slave ship, on the auction block, in an enslaved woman’s ragged rush and run to freedom, nursing White babies instead of our own, when we were defined not really as “women,” not like White women were, when it was asserted by Whites that because we were enslaved women we couldn’t be “raped,” when we were forced to work from dawn to dusk, and carry and bear the weight, fainting in the grip of “the spirit” in a pew on Sunday morning, becoming against the odds “the first Negro woman to_____,” doing the grunt work of organizing behind the scenes for civil and human rights, training a White man who would take our job and then become our boss, standing shocked and silent at the news of the deaths of Trayvon Martin, Eric Garner, Sandra Bland, telling our daughters for the millionth time they have to be twice as good, basking in the acceptance and understanding of sister circles, where we are renewed, but where the cycle of adherence to the identity of the Strong Black Woman is also often reinforced.4
A woman who carries the Strong Black Woman legacy burden comes from a lineage of women who have had these experiences and transmitted them down the generational line, with the need to remain strong reinforced generation after generation by systemic racism and oppression. The legacy-unburdening steps in the vignette that follows were adapted from IFS senior lead trainer Ann Sinko.5 I included ancestors in the unburdening process in a more active way, with a Well Ancestor actively releasing the burden and ushering in the gifts of the line.	A woman who carries the Strong Black Woman legacy burden comes from a lineage of women who have had these experiences and transmitted them down the generational line, with the need to remain strong reinforced generation after generation by systemic racism and oppression. The legacy-unburdening steps in the vignette that follows were adapted from IFS senior lead trainer Ann Sinko.5 I included ancestors in the unburdening process in a more active way, with a Well Ancestor actively releasing the burden and ushering in the gifts of the line.	Женщина, несущая бремя наследия «Сильной черной женщины», происходит из рода женщин, которые имели этот опыт и передавали его из поколения в поколение, а необходимость оставаться сильной из поколения в поколение подкреплялась системным расизмом и угнетением. Шаги по освобождению от наследия, представленные в приведенном ниже примере, были адаптированы старшим ведущим тренером IFS Энн Синко.5 Я включила предков в процесс освобождения от бремени более активным образом, когда предок-колодец активно снимал бремя и открывал дары линии. .	A woman who carries the Strong Black Woman legacy burden comes from a lineage of women who have had these experiences and transmitted them down the generational line, with the need to remain strong reinforced generation after generation by systemic racism and oppression. The legacy-unburdening steps in the vignette that follows were adapted from IFS senior lead trainer Ann Sinko.5 I included ancestors in the unburdening process in a more active way, with a Well Ancestor actively releasing the burden and ushering in the gifts of the line.
Case Vignette 3: Strong Black Woman Legacy Burden and Gifts	Case Vignette 3: Strong Black Woman Legacy Burden and Gifts	Случай 3: Сильная чернокожая женщина. Бремя наследия и подарки	Case Vignette 3: Strong Black Woman Legacy Burden and Gifts
Taren is a 36-year-old Black female therapist who presented for therapy overworked, burned out, feeling like she couldn’t go on but wouldn’t allow herself to stop. Her expressed goal for therapy was better time management skills. She believed with better skills she could accomplish her responsibilities without feeling drained.	Taren is a 36-year-old Black female therapist who presented for therapy overworked, burned out, feeling like she couldn’t go on but wouldn’t allow herself to stop. Her expressed goal for therapy was better time management skills. She believed with better skills she could accomplish her responsibilities without feeling drained.	Тарен — 36-летняя чернокожая женщина-терапевт, которая пришла на терапию перегруженной работой, выгоревшей, чувствуя, что не может продолжать, но не позволяет себе остановиться. Ее заявленная цель терапии заключалась в улучшении навыков управления временем. Она считала, что, обладая лучшими навыками, она сможет выполнять свои обязанности, не чувствуя себя истощенной.	Taren is a 36-year-old Black female therapist who presented for therapy overworked, burned out, feeling like she couldn’t go on but wouldn’t allow herself to stop. Her expressed goal for therapy was better time management skills. She believed with better skills she could accomplish her responsibilities without feeling drained.
She worked 60 or more hours a week as a rule. She was married with two children, ages 12 and 7. She owned a group practice with five employees and four social work student interns. She also carried a caseload of 15 to 20 clients. She held a leadership position in her local chapter of the National Association of Black Social Workers. She was the only caregiver to her ailing mother, whom she visited once or twice a week an hour’s drive away. Taren complained of fatigue, dizziness, and off-and-on swelling of her legs. She attributed the symptoms to her busy work schedule, which was also the reason she gave for not having time to see a doctor.	She worked 60 or more hours a week as a rule. She was married with two children, ages 12 and 7. She owned a group practice with five employees and four social work student interns. She also carried a caseload of 15 to 20 clients. She held a leadership position in her local chapter of the National Association of Black Social Workers. She was the only caregiver to her ailing mother, whom she visited once or twice a week an hour’s drive away. Taren complained of fatigue, dizziness, and off-and-on swelling of her legs. She attributed the symptoms to her busy work schedule, which was also the reason she gave for not having time to see a doctor.	Как правило, она работала 60 и более часов в неделю. Она была замужем, имела двоих детей 12 и 7 лет. У нее была групповая практика, в которой работали пять сотрудников и четыре студента-стажера по социальной работе. Она также обслуживала от 15 до 20 клиентов. Она занимала руководящую должность в местном отделении Национальной ассоциации чернокожих социальных работников. Она была единственной сиделкой у своей больной матери, которую навещала один или два раза в неделю в часе езды от нее. Тарен жаловалась на усталость, головокружение и периодические отеки ног. Она объяснила симптомы своим напряженным рабочим графиком, что также послужило причиной того, что у нее не было времени обратиться к врачу.	She worked 60 or more hours a week as a rule. She was married with two children, ages 12 and 7. She owned a group practice with five employees and four social work student interns. She also carried a caseload of 15 to 20 clients. She held a leadership position in her local chapter of the National Association of Black Social Workers. She was the only caregiver to her ailing mother, whom she visited once or twice a week an hour’s drive away. Taren complained of fatigue, dizziness, and off-and-on swelling of her legs. She attributed the symptoms to her busy work schedule, which was also the reason she gave for not having time to see a doctor.
I assessed the presence of the Strong Black Woman legacy burden when Taren shared the history of her mother, maternal and paternal grandmothers, and aunts. She described the women in her family as “getting things done because if they didn’t, who would?” She comes from a line of women who worked hard, who didn’t ask for help because that was a sign of weakness, and who valued being strong with the ability to press through exhaustion over their needs for rest and care. Taren agreed to explore the possibility that she had a legacy burden of being strong.	I assessed the presence of the Strong Black Woman legacy burden when Taren shared the history of her mother, maternal and paternal grandmothers, and aunts. She described the women in her family as “getting things done because if they didn’t, who would?” She comes from a line of women who worked hard, who didn’t ask for help because that was a sign of weakness, and who valued being strong with the ability to press through exhaustion over their needs for rest and care. Taren agreed to explore the possibility that she had a legacy burden of being strong.	Я оценил наличие бремени наследия «Сильной чернокожей женщины», когда Тарен поделилась историей своей матери, бабушек по материнской и отцовской линии, а также теток. Она описала женщин в своей семье как людей, которые «доводят дела до конца, потому что, если они этого не сделают, то кто?» Она происходит из рода женщин, которые много работали, которые не просили о помощи, потому что это было признаком слабости, и которые ценили силу и способность преодолевать усталость выше своих потребностей в отдыхе и заботе. Тарен согласилась изучить возможность того, что у нее есть унаследованное бремя силы.	I assessed the presence of the Strong Black Woman legacy burden when Taren shared the history of her mother, maternal and paternal grandmothers, and aunts. She described the women in her family as “getting things done because if they didn’t, who would?” She comes from a line of women who worked hard, who didn’t ask for help because that was a sign of weakness, and who valued being strong with the ability to press through exhaustion over their needs for rest and care. Taren agreed to explore the possibility that she had a legacy burden of being strong.
When I asked her where she noticed the need to be strong in her body, Taren answered, “It’s all over, in every cell of my body and flowing through my blood.”	When I asked her where she noticed the need to be strong in her body, Taren answered, “It’s all over, in every cell of my body and flowing through my blood.”	Когда я спросил ее, откуда она заметила потребность быть сильной в своем теле, Тарен ответила: «Это повсюду, в каждой клетке моего тела и течет в моей крови».	When I asked her where she noticed the need to be strong in her body, Taren answered, “It’s all over, in every cell of my body and flowing through my blood.”
When working with legacy, it is important to separate what portion of the burden is legacy and what is not. This is accomplished by determining the percentage of the burden that does not belong to you. So next, I asked Taren, “What percentage of this burden does not belong to you?”	When working with legacy, it is important to separate what portion of the burden is legacy and what is not. This is accomplished by determining the percentage of the burden that does not belong to you. So next, I asked Taren, “What percentage of this burden does not belong to you?”	При работе с наследием важно различать, какая часть бремени является наследием, а какая нет. Это достигается путем определения процента бремени, которое вам не принадлежит. Итак, затем я спросил Тарена: «Какой процент этого бремени не принадлежит тебе?»	When working with legacy, it is important to separate what portion of the burden is legacy and what is not. This is accomplished by determining the percentage of the burden that does not belong to you. So next, I asked Taren, “What percentage of this burden does not belong to you?”
Quickly and firmly she responded, “Eighty-five percent.”	Quickly and firmly she responded, “Eighty-five percent.”	Она быстро и твердо ответила: «Восемьдесят пять процентов».	Quickly and firmly she responded, “Eighty-five percent.”
This means 85 percent of her need to be strong is a legacy burden, the percentage she absorbed from family and/or culture.	This means 85 percent of her need to be strong is a legacy burden, the percentage she absorbed from family and/or culture.	Это означает, что 85 процентов ее потребности быть сильной — это бремя наследия, процент, который она впитала из семьи и/или культуры.	This means 85 percent of her need to be strong is a legacy burden, the percentage she absorbed from family and/or culture.
“Is there any reason for you to hold on to this burden?”	“Is there any reason for you to hold on to this burden?”	«Есть ли у тебя какая-то причина держаться за это бремя?»	“Is there any reason for you to hold on to this burden?”
“Well, yes. I need to be strong to do what I need to do. What will happen to people who depend on me if I’m not strong?”	“Well, yes. I need to be strong to do what I need to do. What will happen to people who depend on me if I’m not strong?”	«Ну да. Мне нужно быть сильным, чтобы делать то, что мне нужно. Что будет с людьми, которые зависят от меня, если я не буду силен?»	“Well, yes. I need to be strong to do what I need to do. What will happen to people who depend on me if I’m not strong?”
“I understand your concern; it makes a lot of sense. What if you could release the burden and remain productive in a way that doesn’t cost you so much? Would you be interested?”	“I understand your concern; it makes a lot of sense. What if you could release the burden and remain productive in a way that doesn’t cost you so much? Would you be interested?”	«Я понимаю ваше беспокойство; это имеет большой смысл. Что, если бы вы могли снять это бремя и оставаться продуктивным, не тратя при этом так много денег? Вам будет интересно?»	“I understand your concern; it makes a lot of sense. What if you could release the burden and remain productive in a way that doesn’t cost you so much? Would you be interested?”
“Yeah, but I don’t know how to do that.”	“Yeah, but I don’t know how to do that.”	— Да, но я не знаю, как это сделать.	“Yeah, but I don’t know how to do that.”
“I can help you with it.”	“I can help you with it.”	— Я могу помочь тебе с этим.	“I can help you with it.”
“Okay, then yes.”	“Okay, then yes.”	— Хорошо, тогда да.	“Okay, then yes.”
It is not unusual for parts to want to hold on to the Strong Black Woman legacy burden. This burden bonds the woman to other women in her family, it is part of her identity, and it serves as protection in an oppressive culture. To assist Taren in releasing this burden, I ask her to invite in any family members and ancestors who also carry this burden. It is important to invite in the Self-energy of these family members so they present in their highest state.	It is not unusual for parts to want to hold on to the Strong Black Woman legacy burden. This burden bonds the woman to other women in her family, it is part of her identity, and it serves as protection in an oppressive culture. To assist Taren in releasing this burden, I ask her to invite in any family members and ancestors who also carry this burden. It is important to invite in the Self-energy of these family members so they present in their highest state.	Нет ничего необычного в том, что некоторые части хотят удержать бремя наследия «Сильной черной женщины». Это бремя связывает женщину с другими женщинами в ее семье, оно является частью ее личности и служит защитой в репрессивной культуре. Чтобы помочь Тарен облегчить это бремя, я прошу ее пригласить всех членов семьи и предков, которые также несут это бремя. Важно пригласить внутреннюю энергию этих членов семьи, чтобы они присутствовали в своем высшем состоянии.	It is not unusual for parts to want to hold on to the Strong Black Woman legacy burden. This burden bonds the woman to other women in her family, it is part of her identity, and it serves as protection in an oppressive culture. To assist Taren in releasing this burden, I ask her to invite in any family members and ancestors who also carry this burden. It is important to invite in the Self-energy of these family members so they present in their highest state.
“Great, Taren, go on and invite in the Self-energy of your mother, grandmother, aunts, and any other family members and ancestors who you inherited this burden from, including those you do not know. Let me know when they’re present.”	“Great, Taren, go on and invite in the Self-energy of your mother, grandmother, aunts, and any other family members and ancestors who you inherited this burden from, including those you do not know. Let me know when they’re present.”	«Отлично, Тарен, продолжай и пригласи в себя энергию своей матери, бабушки, теток и любых других членов семьи и предков, от которых ты унаследовал это бремя, включая тех, кого ты не знаешь. Дайте мне знать, когда они прибудут.	“Great, Taren, go on and invite in the Self-energy of your mother, grandmother, aunts, and any other family members and ancestors who you inherited this burden from, including those you do not know. Let me know when they’re present.”
Taren nods quietly, and after a moment says, “Okay, we’re sitting in a circle.”	Taren nods quietly, and after a moment says, “Okay, we’re sitting in a circle.”	Тарен тихо кивает и через мгновение говорит: «Хорошо, мы сидим в кругу».	Taren nods quietly, and after a moment says, “Okay, we’re sitting in a circle.”
“Now I’d like you to invite a Well Ancestor to come assist with the process.”	“Now I’d like you to invite a Well Ancestor to come assist with the process.”	«Теперь я бы хотел, чтобы вы пригласили Предка Колодца помочь в этом процессе».	“Now I’d like you to invite a Well Ancestor to come assist with the process.”
“Do you mean someone who doesn’t have this burden?”	“Do you mean someone who doesn’t have this burden?”	«Вы имеете в виду кого-то, у кого нет этого бремени?»	“Do you mean someone who doesn’t have this burden?”
“Yes, and well in other ways too.”	“Yes, and well in other ways too.”	— Да, и в других отношениях тоже.	“Yes, and well in other ways too.”
“She’s present, sitting in the middle of the circle.”	“She’s present, sitting in the middle of the circle.”	«Она присутствует, сидит в центре круга».	“She’s present, sitting in the middle of the circle.”
“Good. How do you feel toward your family and ancestors?”	“Good. How do you feel toward your family and ancestors?”	"Хороший. Как вы относитесь к своей семье и предкам?»	“Good. How do you feel toward your family and ancestors?”
With tears streaming down her face, she says, “I love and appreciate them.”	With tears streaming down her face, she says, “I love and appreciate them.”	Со слезами на глазах она говорит: «Я люблю и ценю их».	With tears streaming down her face, she says, “I love and appreciate them.”
“Let them feel that energy from you.”	“Let them feel that energy from you.”	«Позвольте им почувствовать эту энергию от вас».	“Let them feel that energy from you.”
Taren sits quietly nodding, looking around as if making eye contact with the women in the circle.	Taren sits quietly nodding, looking around as if making eye contact with the women in the circle.	Тарен сидит, тихо кивая, оглядываясь по сторонам, словно встречаясь глазами с женщинами в кругу.	Taren sits quietly nodding, looking around as if making eye contact with the women in the circle.
“Okay, Taren, focus again on where you notice the burden in your body. I want you to gather the burden from every cell and every drop of blood and give it to the ones you inherited it from and ask every woman to do the same: remove the burden from herself and give it to the ones she inherited it from.”	“Okay, Taren, focus again on where you notice the burden in your body. I want you to gather the burden from every cell and every drop of blood and give it to the ones you inherited it from and ask every woman to do the same: remove the burden from herself and give it to the ones she inherited it from.”	«Хорошо, Тарен, сосредоточься еще раз на том, где ты замечаешь бремя в своем теле. Я хочу, чтобы ты собрал бремя из каждой клетки и каждой капли крови и отдал его тем, от кого ты его унаследовал, и попроси каждую женщину сделать то же самое: снять бремя с себя и отдать его тем, от кого она его унаследовала. »	“Okay, Taren, focus again on where you notice the burden in your body. I want you to gather the burden from every cell and every drop of blood and give it to the ones you inherited it from and ask every woman to do the same: remove the burden from herself and give it to the ones she inherited it from.”
After some silence, I continue, “When that process is complete, have the last person give the burdens to the Well Ancestor to release the burdens as she sees fit. You don’t have to do anything; just watch the process, and let me know when it’s done.”	After some silence, I continue, “When that process is complete, have the last person give the burdens to the Well Ancestor to release the burdens as she sees fit. You don’t have to do anything; just watch the process, and let me know when it’s done.”	После некоторого молчания я продолжаю: «Когда этот процесс завершится, пусть последний человек отдаст бремя Предку Колодца, чтобы тот освободил его по своему усмотрению. Вам не нужно ничего делать; просто наблюдайте за процессом и дайте мне знать, когда все будет готово».	After some silence, I continue, “When that process is complete, have the last person give the burdens to the Well Ancestor to release the burdens as she sees fit. You don’t have to do anything; just watch the process, and let me know when it’s done.”
Taren is quiet for a few more minutes. Then she says, “The Well Ancestor collected the black tar-like sludge and buried it near a body of water, and a large shade tree grew on that spot.”	Taren is quiet for a few more minutes. Then she says, “The Well Ancestor collected the black tar-like sludge and buried it near a body of water, and a large shade tree grew on that spot.”	Тарен молчит еще несколько минут. Затем она говорит: «Предок-Колодец собрал черную смолоподобную грязь и закопал ее возле водоема, и на этом месте выросло большое тенистое дерево».	Taren is quiet for a few more minutes. Then she says, “The Well Ancestor collected the black tar-like sludge and buried it near a body of water, and a large shade tree grew on that spot.”
“Okay, now ask the Well Ancestor to share the gifts of this line with you, your family members, and ancestors in whatever way she chooses.”	“Okay, now ask the Well Ancestor to share the gifts of this line with you, your family members, and ancestors in whatever way she chooses.”	«Хорошо, теперь попроси Предка Колодца поделиться дарами этой линии с тобой, членами твоей семьи и предками любым способом, который она выберет».	“Okay, now ask the Well Ancestor to share the gifts of this line with you, your family members, and ancestors in whatever way she chooses.”
In silence, tears slide from Taren’s eyes again. Wiping her tears, she shares, “She showed me resting under the tree by the shore and told me I have the gift of knowing when to rest and resting without guilt. I am also gifted with the worthiness of my being and not my doing.”	In silence, tears slide from Taren’s eyes again. Wiping her tears, she shares, “She showed me resting under the tree by the shore and told me I have the gift of knowing when to rest and resting without guilt. I am also gifted with the worthiness of my being and not my doing.”	В тишине из глаз Тарена снова катятся слезы. Вытирая слезы, она делится: «Она показала, как я отдыхаю под деревом на берегу, и сказала, что у меня есть дар знать, когда нужно отдохнуть, и отдыхать без чувства вины. Я также одарён достоинством моего существа, а не моих действий».	In silence, tears slide from Taren’s eyes again. Wiping her tears, she shares, “She showed me resting under the tree by the shore and told me I have the gift of knowing when to rest and resting without guilt. I am also gifted with the worthiness of my being and not my doing.”
“Check in with your body and the places that held the burden. What do you notice?”	“Check in with your body and the places that held the burden. What do you notice?”	«Проверьте свое тело и места, которые удерживали бремя. Что вы заметили?»	“Check in with your body and the places that held the burden. What do you notice?”
“I notice an openness. I feel more energetic. The part that was telling me I had to keep pushing is quiet.”	“I notice an openness. I feel more energetic. The part that was telling me I had to keep pushing is quiet.”	«Я замечаю открытость. Я чувствую себя более энергичным. Та часть, которая говорила мне, что мне нужно продолжать настаивать, молчала».	“I notice an openness. I feel more energetic. The part that was telling me I had to keep pushing is quiet.”
“Very good. Let’s have any parts that need to see the transformation join us. How do they respond?”	“Very good. Let’s have any parts that need to see the transformation join us. How do they respond?”	"Очень хороший. Давайте пригласим к нам присоединиться все части, которым необходимо увидеть трансформацию. Как они реагируют?»	“Very good. Let’s have any parts that need to see the transformation join us. How do they respond?”
“They’re surprised and like the new me.”	“They’re surprised and like the new me.”	«Они удивлены, и им нравится новый я».	“They’re surprised and like the new me.”
“Good. Check in with the parts that released the Strong Black Woman legacy burden and see if they need anything else.”	“Good. Check in with the parts that released the Strong Black Woman legacy burden and see if they need anything else.”	"Хороший. Проверьте части, которые освободили от бремени наследия «Сильной черной женщины», и посмотрите, нужно ли им что-нибудь еще».	“Good. Check in with the parts that released the Strong Black Woman legacy burden and see if they need anything else.”
“Yes, they want me to remain connected to them.”	“Yes, they want me to remain connected to them.”	«Да, они хотят, чтобы я оставался с ними на связи».	“Yes, they want me to remain connected to them.”
“Good, see how they would like to remain connected.”	“Good, see how they would like to remain connected.”	«Хорошо, посмотрим, как они хотели бы оставаться на связи».	“Good, see how they would like to remain connected.”
She nods.	She nods.	Она кивает.	She nods.
“Then show appreciation to your parts, family members, and ancestors for the work done today.”	“Then show appreciation to your parts, family members, and ancestors for the work done today.”	«Тогда выразите признательность своим частям, членам семьи и предкам за работу, проделанную сегодня».	“Then show appreciation to your parts, family members, and ancestors for the work done today.”
When I saw Taren two weeks after the legacy unburdening, she had made changes or had plans for changes in every area of her life. With her husband and children, she called a family meeting. She took responsibility for being ultra-self-reliant, not asking for help, and rejecting it when it was offered. Then she requested more support from them in the home going forward. With her mother, she explained she could no longer travel two hours round trip every week to oversee her care; instead, she offered several alternatives that involved her mother moving closer. At work, Taren came up with a plan to limit her load to 40 hours a week by no longer seeing clients, but instead focusing on managing the group practice and mentoring staff and interns. She also realized she has many capable, talented people on her staff to delegate tasks to. With the changes in her responsibilities at home and work, she turned her attention to her health and scheduled a doctor’s appointment for the following month.	When I saw Taren two weeks after the legacy unburdening, she had made changes or had plans for changes in every area of her life. With her husband and children, she called a family meeting. She took responsibility for being ultra-self-reliant, not asking for help, and rejecting it when it was offered. Then she requested more support from them in the home going forward. With her mother, she explained she could no longer travel two hours round trip every week to oversee her care; instead, she offered several alternatives that involved her mother moving closer. At work, Taren came up with a plan to limit her load to 40 hours a week by no longer seeing clients, but instead focusing on managing the group practice and mentoring staff and interns. She also realized she has many capable, talented people on her staff to delegate tasks to. With the changes in her responsibilities at home and work, she turned her attention to her health and scheduled a doctor’s appointment for the following month.	Когда я увидел Тарен через две недели после освобождения от бремени наследия, она внесла изменения или планировала изменения во всех сферах своей жизни. Вместе с мужем и детьми она созвала семейное собрание. Она взяла на себя ответственность за то, чтобы быть сверхсамостоятельной, не просить о помощи и отвергать ее, когда ее предлагали. Затем она попросила у них дополнительной поддержки в доме в будущем. Вместе со своей матерью она объяснила, что больше не может ездить туда и обратно на два часа каждую неделю, чтобы наблюдать за своим уходом; вместо этого она предложила несколько альтернатив, в которых ее мать подошла ближе. На работе Тарен придумала план ограничить свою нагрузку до 40 часов в неделю, больше не встречаясь с клиентами, а вместо этого сосредоточившись на управлении групповой практикой и наставничестве персонала и стажеров. Она также поняла, что в ее штате много способных и талантливых людей, которым можно делегировать задачи. С изменением ее обязанностей дома и на работе она обратила внимание на свое здоровье и запланировала визит к врачу на следующий месяц.	When I saw Taren two weeks after the legacy unburdening, she had made changes or had plans for changes in every area of her life. With her husband and children, she called a family meeting. She took responsibility for being ultra-self-reliant, not asking for help, and rejecting it when it was offered. Then she requested more support from them in the home going forward. With her mother, she explained she could no longer travel two hours round trip every week to oversee her care; instead, she offered several alternatives that involved her mother moving closer. At work, Taren came up with a plan to limit her load to 40 hours a week by no longer seeing clients, but instead focusing on managing the group practice and mentoring staff and interns. She also realized she has many capable, talented people on her staff to delegate tasks to. With the changes in her responsibilities at home and work, she turned her attention to her health and scheduled a doctor’s appointment for the following month.
Taren shared that before the legacy unburdening, she put everyone and everything before herself. She described herself as being on “auto-pilot without an off switch.” She said that being relieved of the burden provided clarity and gave her the much-needed space to make choices in her best interest without guilt instead of doing what she had always done.	Taren shared that before the legacy unburdening, she put everyone and everything before herself. She described herself as being on “auto-pilot without an off switch.” She said that being relieved of the burden provided clarity and gave her the much-needed space to make choices in her best interest without guilt instead of doing what she had always done.	Тарен поделилась, что, прежде чем обременить наследие, она поставила всех и вся перед собой. Она описала себя как находящуюся на «автопилоте без выключателя». Она сказала, что освобождение от бремени внесло ясность и дало ей столь необходимое пространство, чтобы делать выбор в своих интересах без чувства вины, вместо того, чтобы делать то, что она всегда делала.	Taren shared that before the legacy unburdening, she put everyone and everything before herself. She described herself as being on “auto-pilot without an off switch.” She said that being relieved of the burden provided clarity and gave her the much-needed space to make choices in her best interest without guilt instead of doing what she had always done.
You may have questions about the remaining 15 percent of Taren’s burden, since she reported that 85 percent did not belong to her. The portion that was not a legacy burden was a personal burden, which we worked through in later sessions. It is possible for a burden to be partially from our lived experience (personal burden), inherited from our family or ethnic group (legacy burden), and absorbed from our culture (cultural legacy burden).	You may have questions about the remaining 15 percent of Taren’s burden, since she reported that 85 percent did not belong to her. The portion that was not a legacy burden was a personal burden, which we worked through in later sessions. It is possible for a burden to be partially from our lived experience (personal burden), inherited from our family or ethnic group (legacy burden), and absorbed from our culture (cultural legacy burden).	У вас могут возникнуть вопросы по поводу оставшихся 15 процентов ноши Тарен, поскольку она сообщила, что 85 процентов ей не принадлежат. Та часть, которая не была унаследованным бременем, была личным бременем, над которым мы работали на последующих сессиях. Бремя может быть частично основано на нашем жизненном опыте (личное бремя), унаследовано от нашей семьи или этнической группы (бремя наследия) и поглощено нашей культурой (бремя культурного наследия).	You may have questions about the remaining 15 percent of Taren’s burden, since she reported that 85 percent did not belong to her. The portion that was not a legacy burden was a personal burden, which we worked through in later sessions. It is possible for a burden to be partially from our lived experience (personal burden), inherited from our family or ethnic group (legacy burden), and absorbed from our culture (cultural legacy burden).
Meditation: Cabin with the Ancestor	Meditation: Cabin with the Ancestor	Медитация: Хижина с Предком	Meditation: Cabin with the Ancestor
This meditation was the first one given to me by the ancestors—the meditation I presented for the first time at the Black Therapists Rock Legacy Burden and Heirloom Summit. The meditation encourages a relationship between the listener and an ancestor. It supports releasing a long-held burden with the ancestor’s support and receiving legacy gifts. This meditation can be used when a legacy burden has been identified or when a connection with ancestors would be useful in the healing process.	This meditation was the first one given to me by the ancestors—the meditation I presented for the first time at the Black Therapists Rock Legacy Burden and Heirloom Summit. The meditation encourages a relationship between the listener and an ancestor. It supports releasing a long-held burden with the ancestor’s support and receiving legacy gifts. This meditation can be used when a legacy burden has been identified or when a connection with ancestors would be useful in the healing process.	Эта медитация была первой, подаренной мне предками, — медитацией, которую я впервые представил на саммите «Бремя и семейные реликвии черных терапевтов». Медитация поощряет отношения между слушателем и предком. Он поддерживает освобождение от давнего бремени при поддержке предка и получение даров наследия. Эту медитацию можно использовать, когда выявлено бремя наследия или когда связь с предками может быть полезна в процессе исцеления.	This meditation was the first one given to me by the ancestors—the meditation I presented for the first time at the Black Therapists Rock Legacy Burden and Heirloom Summit. The meditation encourages a relationship between the listener and an ancestor. It supports releasing a long-held burden with the ancestor’s support and receiving legacy gifts. This meditation can be used when a legacy burden has been identified or when a connection with ancestors would be useful in the healing process.
Relax and find a comfortable position to help your body settle.	Relax and find a comfortable position to help your body settle.	Расслабьтесь и найдите удобное положение, которое поможет вашему телу успокоиться.	Relax and find a comfortable position to help your body settle.
Close your eyes if that feels right.	Close your eyes if that feels right.	Закройте глаза, если это кажется правильным.	Close your eyes if that feels right.
As you go inside, notice your body breathing.	As you go inside, notice your body breathing.	Зайдя внутрь, обратите внимание на дыхание вашего тела.	As you go inside, notice your body breathing.
Is it shallow and short or deep and long?	Is it shallow and short or deep and long?	Оно мелкое и короткое или глубокое и длинное?	Is it shallow and short or deep and long?
As you notice, see if you can lengthen and deepen each breath.	As you notice, see if you can lengthen and deepen each breath.	Как заметите, проверьте, можете ли вы удлинить и углубить каждое дыхание.	As you notice, see if you can lengthen and deepen each breath.
Imagine yourself in a lush green forest surrounded by your favorite trees, plants, and flowers.	Imagine yourself in a lush green forest surrounded by your favorite trees, plants, and flowers.	Представьте себя в пышном зеленом лесу, окруженном вашими любимыми деревьями, растениями и цветами.	Imagine yourself in a lush green forest surrounded by your favorite trees, plants, and flowers.
As you explore the forest, a walking path appears before you. You take the path.	As you explore the forest, a walking path appears before you. You take the path.	Когда вы исследуете лес, перед вами появляется пешеходная тропа. Вы идете по пути.	As you explore the forest, a walking path appears before you. You take the path.
You walk until you come upon an overgrown patch that obstructs your view.	You walk until you come upon an overgrown patch that obstructs your view.	Вы идете, пока не натыкаетесь на заросший участок, закрывающий вам обзор.	You walk until you come upon an overgrown patch that obstructs your view.
Curiously you part the brush to see what lies beyond.	Curiously you part the brush to see what lies beyond.	С любопытством вы раздвигаете кисть, чтобы увидеть, что находится за ней.	Curiously you part the brush to see what lies beyond.
A short distance away, you see a cabin.	A short distance away, you see a cabin.	Недалеко вы видите хижину.	A short distance away, you see a cabin.
The cabin beckons; as you get closer, you notice a welcoming warm glow inside.	The cabin beckons; as you get closer, you notice a welcoming warm glow inside.	Кабина манит; Подойдя ближе, вы замечаете гостеприимное теплое свечение внутри.	The cabin beckons; as you get closer, you notice a welcoming warm glow inside.
Arriving at the door, you enter the cabin and find a wise ancestor seemingly waiting for your arrival.	Arriving at the door, you enter the cabin and find a wise ancestor seemingly waiting for your arrival.	Подойдя к двери, вы входите в каюту и обнаруживаете мудрого предка, словно ожидающего вашего прибытия.	Arriving at the door, you enter the cabin and find a wise ancestor seemingly waiting for your arrival.
If you arrive at the cabin and an ancestor is not present, take a few breaths and check and see if there are parts present preventing you from connecting with an ancestor.	If you arrive at the cabin and an ancestor is not present, take a few breaths and check and see if there are parts present preventing you from connecting with an ancestor.	Если вы приедете в хижину, а предка нет, сделайте несколько вдохов и проверьте, есть ли какие-либо детали, мешающие вам соединиться с предком.	If you arrive at the cabin and an ancestor is not present, take a few breaths and check and see if there are parts present preventing you from connecting with an ancestor.
If so, be with those parts and explore their concerns/fears about connection with an ancestor.	If so, be with those parts and explore their concerns/fears about connection with an ancestor.	Если да, будьте с этими частями и изучите их опасения/страхи по поводу связи с предком.	If so, be with those parts and explore their concerns/fears about connection with an ancestor.
If there isn’t a part with concerns, see if there are parts disappointed, surprised, hurt; be with those parts in the way they need you to be.	If there isn’t a part with concerns, see if there are parts disappointed, surprised, hurt; be with those parts in the way they need you to be.	Если нет части, вызывающей беспокойство, посмотрите, есть ли части, разочарованные, удивленные, обиженные; будьте с этими частями такими, какими они хотят, чтобы вы были.	If there isn’t a part with concerns, see if there are parts disappointed, surprised, hurt; be with those parts in the way they need you to be.
If an ancestor joins later, connect with them in whatever way feels good and right.	If an ancestor joins later, connect with them in whatever way feels good and right.	Если предок присоединяется позже, общайтесь с ним любым удобным и правильным способом.	If an ancestor joins later, connect with them in whatever way feels good and right.
If an ancestor is present, you can join your ancestor on the floor.	If an ancestor is present, you can join your ancestor on the floor.	Если предок присутствует, вы можете присоединиться к своему предку на полу.	If an ancestor is present, you can join your ancestor on the floor.
Notice how happy your ancestor is to see you.	Notice how happy your ancestor is to see you.	Обратите внимание, как ваш предок рад вас видеть.	Notice how happy your ancestor is to see you.
The ancestor tells you they have come to help you with a burden, one you have carried for some time.	The ancestor tells you they have come to help you with a burden, one you have carried for some time.	Предок сообщает вам, что они пришли помочь вам с бременем, которое вы несли какое-то время.	The ancestor tells you they have come to help you with a burden, one you have carried for some time.
They invite you to notice where in or around your body the burden is found.	They invite you to notice where in or around your body the burden is found.	Они приглашают вас заметить, где внутри или вокруг вашего тела находится бремя.	They invite you to notice where in or around your body the burden is found.
They then instruct you to breathe into that place.	They then instruct you to breathe into that place.	Затем они поручают вам дышать в это место.	They then instruct you to breathe into that place.
The ancestor compassionately opens their arms, encouraging you to give the burden to them.	The ancestor compassionately opens their arms, encouraging you to give the burden to them.	Предок сострадательно раскрывает свои объятия, призывая вас передать им это бремя.	The ancestor compassionately opens their arms, encouraging you to give the burden to them.
If parts won’t allow you to give the burden over, that’s okay. Sit with those parts, asking about their fears and concerns.	If parts won’t allow you to give the burden over, that’s okay. Sit with those parts, asking about their fears and concerns.	Если детали не позволяют вам передать нагрузку, ничего страшного. Посидите с этими частями, расспрашивая об их страхах и беспокойствах.	If parts won’t allow you to give the burden over, that’s okay. Sit with those parts, asking about their fears and concerns.
If you are able, give the burden over in whatever way or portion that seems right.	If you are able, give the burden over in whatever way or portion that seems right.	Если вы можете, передайте это бремя любым способом или в той части, которая кажется вам подходящей.	If you are able, give the burden over in whatever way or portion that seems right.
As the burden leaves you, see what you notice.	As the burden leaves you, see what you notice.	Когда бремя покинет вас, посмотрите, что вы заметите.	As the burden leaves you, see what you notice.
Next, the ancestor hands you an ornately carved wooden box.	Next, the ancestor hands you an ornately carved wooden box.	Далее предок вручает вам богато украшенную резную деревянную шкатулку.	Next, the ancestor hands you an ornately carved wooden box.
Opening the box, you discover gifts designed and chosen especially for you.	Opening the box, you discover gifts designed and chosen especially for you.	Открыв коробку, вы обнаруживаете подарки, созданные и выбранные специально для вас.	Opening the box, you discover gifts designed and chosen especially for you.
One by one, receive each heirloom into your body.	One by one, receive each heirloom into your body.	Одну за другой принимайте каждую семейную реликвию в свое тело.	One by one, receive each heirloom into your body.
Consider how you will use your gifts in your life.	Consider how you will use your gifts in your life.	Подумайте, как вы будете использовать свои дары в своей жизни.	Consider how you will use your gifts in your life.
Once the embodiment is complete,	Once the embodiment is complete,	Как только воплощение будет завершено,	Once the embodiment is complete,
the ancestor says,	the ancestor says,	предок говорит,	the ancestor says,
you are deeply loved,	you are deeply loved,	ты глубоко любим,	you are deeply loved,
you are whole,	you are whole,	ты целый,	you are whole,
you are the realization of my dreams,	you are the realization of my dreams,	ты воплощение моей мечты,	you are the realization of my dreams,
and you are welcome to come back as often as you wish.	and you are welcome to come back as often as you wish.	и вы можете возвращаться так часто, как пожелаете.	and you are welcome to come back as often as you wish.
As you prepare to leave the cabin, offer gratitude and good-byes to your ancestor in a way of your choosing.	As you prepare to leave the cabin, offer gratitude and good-byes to your ancestor in a way of your choosing.	Готовясь покинуть хижину, выразите благодарность и прощание своему предку любым способом по вашему выбору.	As you prepare to leave the cabin, offer gratitude and good-byes to your ancestor in a way of your choosing.
Exiting the cabin carrying the wooden box, you return to the forest path, retracing your steps.	Exiting the cabin carrying the wooden box, you return to the forest path, retracing your steps.	Выйдя из хижины с деревянным ящиком, вы возвращаетесь на лесную тропинку, повторяя свои шаги.	Exiting the cabin carrying the wooden box, you return to the forest path, retracing your steps.
Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.	Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.	Направьте свое осознание на свое дыхание и дышите, возвращаясь в этот момент и пространство. Медленно откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: Cabin with the Ancestor Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Cabin with the Ancestor Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Хижина с вопросами о дневнике предков	Exercise 2: Cabin with the Ancestor Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили медитацию «Хижина с предком» и написали быстрый «Захват журнала», потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое исследование, ответив на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Cabin with the Ancestor meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
What was your immediate experience and impression of your ancestor?	What was your immediate experience and impression of your ancestor?	Каким был ваш непосредственный опыт и впечатление о вашем предке?	What was your immediate experience and impression of your ancestor?
Where did you notice your burden?	Where did you notice your burden?	Где вы заметили свое бремя?	Where did you notice your burden?
If there is an image connected with the burden, draw it in your journal.	If there is an image connected with the burden, draw it in your journal.	Если есть образ, связанный с бременем, нарисуйте его в своем дневнике.	If there is an image connected with the burden, draw it in your journal.
Did you willingly give your burden to your ancestor? Why, why not?	Did you willingly give your burden to your ancestor? Why, why not?	Вы добровольно отдали свое бремя своему предку? Почему, почему бы и нет?	Did you willingly give your burden to your ancestor? Why, why not?
What changes did you notice as you gave the burden away, if any?	What changes did you notice as you gave the burden away, if any?	Какие изменения вы заметили, когда избавились от бремени, если таковые были?	What changes did you notice as you gave the burden away, if any?
What gifts did your ancestor give to you?	What gifts did your ancestor give to you?	Какие подарки преподнес тебе твой предок?	What gifts did your ancestor give to you?
How will you use these gifts moving forward?	How will you use these gifts moving forward?	Как вы будете использовать эти дары в будущем?	How will you use these gifts moving forward?
Will you continue a relationship with this ancestor? Why, why not?	Will you continue a relationship with this ancestor? Why, why not?	Будете ли вы продолжать отношения с этим предком? Почему, почему бы и нет?	Will you continue a relationship with this ancestor? Why, why not?
If so, how?	If so, how?	Если да, то как?	If so, how?
Exercise 3: Understanding Your Legacy Burden	Exercise 3: Understanding Your Legacy Burden	Упражнение 3. Понимание своего бремени наследия	Exercise 3: Understanding Your Legacy Burden
This exercise will help you to get to know and understand another part that carries a legacy burden.	This exercise will help you to get to know and understand another part that carries a legacy burden.	Это упражнение поможет вам узнать и понять другую часть, несущую бремя наследия.	This exercise will help you to get to know and understand another part that carries a legacy burden.
What is the legacy burden?	What is the legacy burden?	Каково бремя наследия?	What is the legacy burden?
Who in your family did you inherit this legacy burden from?	Who in your family did you inherit this legacy burden from?	От кого в вашей семье вы унаследовали это бремя наследия?	Who in your family did you inherit this legacy burden from?
Copy the circle below into your journal, then color in the percentage of this burden that does not belong to you.	Copy the circle below into your journal, then color in the percentage of this burden that does not belong to you.	Скопируйте кружок ниже в свой дневник, затем закрасьте процент этого бремени, которое вам не принадлежит.	Copy the circle below into your journal, then color in the percentage of this burden that does not belong to you.
Where do you find this burden in or around your body?	Where do you find this burden in or around your body?	Где вы находите это бремя внутри или вокруг вашего тела?	Where do you find this burden in or around your body?
Which parts carry the legacy burden?	Which parts carry the legacy burden?	Какие части несут бремя наследия?	Which parts carry the legacy burden?
Close your eyes and notice how you experience the legacy burden in your body.	Close your eyes and notice how you experience the legacy burden in your body.	Закройте глаза и обратите внимание, как вы ощущаете бремя наследия в своем теле.	Close your eyes and notice how you experience the legacy burden in your body.
What does it sound like?	What does it sound like?	Как это звучит?	What does it sound like?
What does it say?	What does it say?	Что это говорит?	What does it say?
How does it feel in your body?	How does it feel in your body?	Как это ощущается в вашем теле?	How does it feel in your body?
What does it think?	What does it think?	Что оно думает?	What does it think?
What are its emotions?	What are its emotions?	Каковы его эмоции?	What are its emotions?
If it shows as an image, draw it in your journal.	If it shows as an image, draw it in your journal.	Если оно отображается в виде изображения, нарисуйте его в своем дневнике.	If it shows as an image, draw it in your journal.
What are the benefits of this legacy burden?	What are the benefits of this legacy burden?	Каковы преимущества этого бремени наследия?	What are the benefits of this legacy burden?
What is the cost of this legacy burden?	What is the cost of this legacy burden?	Какова цена этого бремени наследия?	What is the cost of this legacy burden?
Complete this statement: “If I didn’t have this legacy burden, I could . . .”	Complete this statement: “If I didn’t have this legacy burden, I could . . .”	Завершите это утверждение: «Если бы у меня не было этого бремени наследия, я мог бы… . ».	Complete this statement: “If I didn’t have this legacy burden, I could . . .”
CHAPTER 12	CHAPTER 12	ГЛАВА 12	CHAPTER 12
Trailblazer	Trailblazer	Первопроходец	Trailblazer
Integrating Unburdened Parts	Integrating Unburdened Parts	Интеграция необремененных частей	Integrating Unburdened Parts
The unburdening freed me. I feel like a brand-new girl. I no longer need to be tucked away and protected by Pricklee. Even though I’m still nine-year-old Tamala, I feel bigger, more lovable, and worthy. I feel connected to those around me instead of abandoned. I don’t look to others to prove my worthiness. I am worthy because I exist. When I was hidden away, I felt physically small and unimportant. Releasing my burdens released my fears. I feel like I can do anything. I know I am not alone. Before, I didn’t know there was someone to love me and to listen and understand. But now I love Tamala and she loves me. We have each other.	The unburdening freed me. I feel like a brand-new girl. I no longer need to be tucked away and protected by Pricklee. Even though I’m still nine-year-old Tamala, I feel bigger, more lovable, and worthy. I feel connected to those around me instead of abandoned. I don’t look to others to prove my worthiness. I am worthy because I exist. When I was hidden away, I felt physically small and unimportant. Releasing my burdens released my fears. I feel like I can do anything. I know I am not alone. Before, I didn’t know there was someone to love me and to listen and understand. But now I love Tamala and she loves me. We have each other.	Освобождение освободило меня. Я чувствую себя новенькой девушкой. Мне больше не нужно, чтобы меня прятал и защищал Прикли. Хотя мне все еще девятилетняя Тамала, я чувствую себя более крупной, милой и достойной. Я чувствую связь с окружающими, а не покинутость. Я не жду от других доказательств своей значимости. Я достоин, потому что я существую. Когда меня прятали, я чувствовал себя физически маленьким и неважным. Освобождение от моего бремени освободило мои страхи. Я чувствую, что могу все. Я знаю, что я не одинок. Раньше я не знала, что есть кто-то, кто меня полюбит, выслушает и поймет. Но теперь я люблю Тамалу, и она любит меня. Мы есть друг у друга.	The unburdening freed me. I feel like a brand-new girl. I no longer need to be tucked away and protected by Pricklee. Even though I’m still nine-year-old Tamala, I feel bigger, more lovable, and worthy. I feel connected to those around me instead of abandoned. I don’t look to others to prove my worthiness. I am worthy because I exist. When I was hidden away, I felt physically small and unimportant. Releasing my burdens released my fears. I feel like I can do anything. I know I am not alone. Before, I didn’t know there was someone to love me and to listen and understand. But now I love Tamala and she loves me. We have each other.
She came to me and asked what I want to be called now that I am free of my burdens. Up to that point, she referred to me as her younger self, the nine-year-old, and the exile. Those names no longer fit. With my gift returned, I placed my index finger at my closed lips, pointing upward, closed my eyes, and asked her and everyone inside to call me Shhhh. They, too, will need to place their finger at their lips with their eyes closed when they say my name, because it is both a sound and an action. I came here with the ability to sense things, and I am most sensitive to knowing when I get quiet. My name is a reminder to Tamala and the others that the best way to benefit from my gift and connect with me is in silence.	She came to me and asked what I want to be called now that I am free of my burdens. Up to that point, she referred to me as her younger self, the nine-year-old, and the exile. Those names no longer fit. With my gift returned, I placed my index finger at my closed lips, pointing upward, closed my eyes, and asked her and everyone inside to call me Shhhh. They, too, will need to place their finger at their lips with their eyes closed when they say my name, because it is both a sound and an action. I came here with the ability to sense things, and I am most sensitive to knowing when I get quiet. My name is a reminder to Tamala and the others that the best way to benefit from my gift and connect with me is in silence.	Она подошла ко мне и спросила, как я хочу называться теперь, когда я свободна от своего бремени. До этого момента она называла меня самой молодой, девятилетней и изгнанницей. Эти имена больше не подходят. Вернув подарок, я приложил указательный палец к закрытым губам, указывая вверх, закрыл глаза и попросил ее и всех внутри называть меня «Шшшш». Им тоже нужно будет приложить палец к губам с закрытыми глазами, когда они произносят мое имя, потому что это и звук, и действие. Я пришел сюда со способностью чувствовать вещи, и я наиболее чувствителен к пониманию того, когда я замолкаю. Мое имя — напоминание Тамале и остальным о том, что лучший способ извлечь выгоду из моего дара и связаться со мной — это молчать.	She came to me and asked what I want to be called now that I am free of my burdens. Up to that point, she referred to me as her younger self, the nine-year-old, and the exile. Those names no longer fit. With my gift returned, I placed my index finger at my closed lips, pointing upward, closed my eyes, and asked her and everyone inside to call me Shhhh. They, too, will need to place their finger at their lips with their eyes closed when they say my name, because it is both a sound and an action. I came here with the ability to sense things, and I am most sensitive to knowing when I get quiet. My name is a reminder to Tamala and the others that the best way to benefit from my gift and connect with me is in silence.
Pricklee was the biggest challenger to my transformation. When she first saw me after the unburdening, she appeared shocked and speechless. She stared, taking in my sparkly newness and confidence with disbelief. When she did speak, she said, “I feel like you don’t need me. What will I do now? What if something unpredictable happens, then what? Will you need me to protect you then? I keep you and Tamala safe from hurting.” I reassured Pricklee that I didn’t need her to protect me. I let her know that I have something of value to benefit us all. Self informed Pricklee that she, too, could choose another role in the system since she didn’t have to protect me in the same way.	Pricklee was the biggest challenger to my transformation. When she first saw me after the unburdening, she appeared shocked and speechless. She stared, taking in my sparkly newness and confidence with disbelief. When she did speak, she said, “I feel like you don’t need me. What will I do now? What if something unpredictable happens, then what? Will you need me to protect you then? I keep you and Tamala safe from hurting.” I reassured Pricklee that I didn’t need her to protect me. I let her know that I have something of value to benefit us all. Self informed Pricklee that she, too, could choose another role in the system since she didn’t have to protect me in the same way.	Прикли был самым большим препятствием на пути моей трансформации. Когда она впервые увидела меня после освобождения от бремени, она выглядела потрясенной и потерявшей дар речи. Она смотрела, с недоверием воспринимая мою блестящую новизну и уверенность. Когда она все же заговорила, она сказала: «Я чувствую, что я тебе не нужна. Что мне теперь делать? А если произойдет что-то непредсказуемое, что тогда? Тогда тебе понадобится моя защита? Я защищаю тебя и Тамалу от вреда. Я заверил Прикли, что мне не нужна ее защита. Я дал ей понять, что у меня есть что-то ценное, что принесет пользу всем нам. Селф сообщил Прикли, что она тоже может выбрать другую роль в системе, поскольку ей не нужно защищать меня таким же образом.	Pricklee was the biggest challenger to my transformation. When she first saw me after the unburdening, she appeared shocked and speechless. She stared, taking in my sparkly newness and confidence with disbelief. When she did speak, she said, “I feel like you don’t need me. What will I do now? What if something unpredictable happens, then what? Will you need me to protect you then? I keep you and Tamala safe from hurting.” I reassured Pricklee that I didn’t need her to protect me. I let her know that I have something of value to benefit us all. Self informed Pricklee that she, too, could choose another role in the system since she didn’t have to protect me in the same way.
Snapping her fingers, Pricklee said, “Just like that, I can choose a different job? I don’t have to protect Shhhh any longer?”	Snapping her fingers, Pricklee said, “Just like that, I can choose a different job? I don’t have to protect Shhhh any longer?”	Щелкнув пальцами, Прикли сказала: — Вот так я смогу выбрать другую работу? Мне больше не нужно защищать Шшшш?»	Snapping her fingers, Pricklee said, “Just like that, I can choose a different job? I don’t have to protect Shhhh any longer?”
“Yes, look at Shhhh. Does she appear to need your protection?”	“Yes, look at Shhhh. Does she appear to need your protection?”	«Да, посмотри на Шшшш. Похоже, ей нужна ваша защита?	“Yes, look at Shhhh. Does she appear to need your protection?”
“Well, no, but . . .” Her words trailed off.	“Well, no, but . . .” Her words trailed off.	«Ну нет, но… . ». Ее слова затихли.	“Well, no, but . . .” Her words trailed off.
“If you could choose to be or do anything you want, what would it be?” Self inquired.	“If you could choose to be or do anything you want, what would it be?” Self inquired.	«Если бы вы могли выбрать быть или делать все, что захотите, что бы это было?» Сам спросил.	“If you could choose to be or do anything you want, what would it be?” Self inquired.
“I know what I don’t want. I don’t want to be on high alert anymore. Constantly scanning for what could go wrong, course correcting to avoid unknown dangers, and reacting on autopilot with no control. I’m not sure what to do instead. I need time to think about it.”	“I know what I don’t want. I don’t want to be on high alert anymore. Constantly scanning for what could go wrong, course correcting to avoid unknown dangers, and reacting on autopilot with no control. I’m not sure what to do instead. I need time to think about it.”	«Я знаю, чего я не хочу. Я больше не хочу быть в состоянии повышенной готовности. Постоянно отслеживая, что может пойти не так, корректируя курс, чтобы избежать неизвестных опасностей, и реагируя на автопилоте без всякого контроля. Я не знаю, что делать вместо этого. Мне нужно время, чтобы подумать об этом».	“I know what I don’t want. I don’t want to be on high alert anymore. Constantly scanning for what could go wrong, course correcting to avoid unknown dangers, and reacting on autopilot with no control. I’m not sure what to do instead. I need time to think about it.”
IFS CONCEPT 1: INTEGRATION	IFS CONCEPT 1: INTEGRATION	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: ИНТЕГРАЦИЯ	IFS CONCEPT 1: INTEGRATION
Our internal family is referred to as a system. The reason is quite apparent after a part is unburdened. When a change happens in one area of a system, other areas in the system have to adapt by changing in some way. Before an exile is unburdened, the internal system is kept in balance with managers and firefighters protecting the system and person from the pains of the exile. After unburdening occurs and the exile is transformed, the roles of protectors aren’t necessary in the same way. Just as the exile takes on a new role in the system, protectors can do the same. A new type of balance is created through integration. The system needs to reorganize to accommodate new roles for parts. Integration occurs by bringing all the parts that were involved in the unburdening process to come and see the transformation of the newly unburdened part. The part that was once called an exile is now simply a part of the system. It is no longer referred to as an exile because it is no longer burdened and hidden away. The protectors of this part, the parts that expressed concerns or fears about Self connecting with the exile, and parts that had to unblend in order for the healing work to proceed are all called together to observe the changes in the unburdened part. This is done to see if these parts have any concerns about the transformation. Most often parts are accepting of the change. They may express surprise that the healing process worked, especially those parts that were skeptical. Protectors may share their concerns about their role now that it is apparent that their previous job is no longer necessary, or they may be concerned that the change won’t last. As part of the integration process, Self will address the protectors’ concerns. When the concerns of protectors are adequately addressed, protectors are invited to take on new roles within the system. The integration of changes in the internal system will translate to change in the external world, as the person will be less reactive to people and situations that previously caused activation or a trigger response.	Our internal family is referred to as a system. The reason is quite apparent after a part is unburdened. When a change happens in one area of a system, other areas in the system have to adapt by changing in some way. Before an exile is unburdened, the internal system is kept in balance with managers and firefighters protecting the system and person from the pains of the exile. After unburdening occurs and the exile is transformed, the roles of protectors aren’t necessary in the same way. Just as the exile takes on a new role in the system, protectors can do the same. A new type of balance is created through integration. The system needs to reorganize to accommodate new roles for parts. Integration occurs by bringing all the parts that were involved in the unburdening process to come and see the transformation of the newly unburdened part. The part that was once called an exile is now simply a part of the system. It is no longer referred to as an exile because it is no longer burdened and hidden away. The protectors of this part, the parts that expressed concerns or fears about Self connecting with the exile, and parts that had to unblend in order for the healing work to proceed are all called together to observe the changes in the unburdened part. This is done to see if these parts have any concerns about the transformation. Most often parts are accepting of the change. They may express surprise that the healing process worked, especially those parts that were skeptical. Protectors may share their concerns about their role now that it is apparent that their previous job is no longer necessary, or they may be concerned that the change won’t last. As part of the integration process, Self will address the protectors’ concerns. When the concerns of protectors are adequately addressed, protectors are invited to take on new roles within the system. The integration of changes in the internal system will translate to change in the external world, as the person will be less reactive to people and situations that previously caused activation or a trigger response.	Наша внутренняя семья называется системой. Причина становится совершенно очевидной после того, как часть освобождается от нагрузки. Когда изменения происходят в одной области системы, другие области системы должны адаптироваться, изменяясь тем или иным образом. Прежде чем изгнанник освободится от бремени, внутренняя система поддерживается в равновесии с менеджерами и пожарными, защищающими систему и человека от болей изгнанника. После того как происходит освобождение от бремени и трансформация изгнанника, роли защитников уже не нужны. Точно так же, как изгнанник берет на себя новую роль в системе, защитники могут делать то же самое. Благодаря интеграции создается новый тип баланса. Систему необходимо реорганизовать, чтобы учесть новые роли деталей. Интеграция происходит за счет того, что все части, которые были вовлечены в процесс освобождения от бремени, приходят и видят трансформацию вновь освобожденной от бремени части. Та часть, которую когда-то называли изгнанником, теперь является просто частью системы. Его больше не называют изгнанником, потому что он больше не обременен и не спрятан. Защитники этой части, части, которые выражали обеспокоенность или страхи по поводу соединения «Я» с изгнанником, и части, которым пришлось раствориться, чтобы продолжить работу по исцелению, — все собираются вместе, чтобы наблюдать изменения в необременённой части. Это делается для того, чтобы увидеть, есть ли у этих частей какие-либо опасения по поводу трансформации. Чаще всего части принимают изменения. Они могут выразить удивление тем, что процесс исцеления сработал, особенно те части, которые были настроены скептически. Защитники могут поделиться своими опасениями по поводу своей роли теперь, когда стало очевидно, что их предыдущая работа больше не нужна, или они могут быть обеспокоены тем, что изменения не продлятся долго. В рамках процесса интеграции Селф будет решать проблемы защитников. Когда проблемы защитников решаются должным образом, защитникам предлагается взять на себя новые роли в системе. Интеграция изменений во внутренней системе приведет к изменениям во внешнем мире, поскольку человек станет менее реактивным на людей и ситуации, которые ранее вызывали активацию или триггерную реакцию.	Our internal family is referred to as a system. The reason is quite apparent after a part is unburdened. When a change happens in one area of a system, other areas in the system have to adapt by changing in some way. Before an exile is unburdened, the internal system is kept in balance with managers and firefighters protecting the system and person from the pains of the exile. After unburdening occurs and the exile is transformed, the roles of protectors aren’t necessary in the same way. Just as the exile takes on a new role in the system, protectors can do the same. A new type of balance is created through integration. The system needs to reorganize to accommodate new roles for parts. Integration occurs by bringing all the parts that were involved in the unburdening process to come and see the transformation of the newly unburdened part. The part that was once called an exile is now simply a part of the system. It is no longer referred to as an exile because it is no longer burdened and hidden away. The protectors of this part, the parts that expressed concerns or fears about Self connecting with the exile, and parts that had to unblend in order for the healing work to proceed are all called together to observe the changes in the unburdened part. This is done to see if these parts have any concerns about the transformation. Most often parts are accepting of the change. They may express surprise that the healing process worked, especially those parts that were skeptical. Protectors may share their concerns about their role now that it is apparent that their previous job is no longer necessary, or they may be concerned that the change won’t last. As part of the integration process, Self will address the protectors’ concerns. When the concerns of protectors are adequately addressed, protectors are invited to take on new roles within the system. The integration of changes in the internal system will translate to change in the external world, as the person will be less reactive to people and situations that previously caused activation or a trigger response.
This happens because the part that was exiled is no longer seeking redemption from people and situations like their trauma experiences. Instead of looking for validation of their worthiness and lovability, they can create genuine connections because they have released their burdens and can express the innate positive qualities they were born with before they became burdened.	This happens because the part that was exiled is no longer seeking redemption from people and situations like their trauma experiences. Instead of looking for validation of their worthiness and lovability, they can create genuine connections because they have released their burdens and can express the innate positive qualities they were born with before they became burdened.	Это происходит потому, что та часть, которая была изгнана, больше не ищет искупления от людей и ситуаций, подобных их травматическому опыту. Вместо того, чтобы искать подтверждения своей ценности и привлекательности, они могут создавать настоящие связи, поскольку освободились от своего бремени и могут выразить врожденные положительные качества, с которыми они родились до того, как стали обремененными.	This happens because the part that was exiled is no longer seeking redemption from people and situations like their trauma experiences. Instead of looking for validation of their worthiness and lovability, they can create genuine connections because they have released their burdens and can express the innate positive qualities they were born with before they became burdened.
With the changes in the formerly exiled part, protectors no longer need to respond proactively by controlling our lives to keep us safe from the pain of the exile or reactively extinguishing the pain once it’s experienced. They can embrace their natural essence and take on a role in the system that reflects who they really are. Because the role protectors take on is a type of burden also. In most cases, protectors readily take on new roles after the unburdening of the exile. However, less frequently, complete integration requires healing of the protector. The healing process of a protector is the same as that of healing an exile. The protector will need witnessing and unburdening before it can take on a new role in the system.	With the changes in the formerly exiled part, protectors no longer need to respond proactively by controlling our lives to keep us safe from the pain of the exile or reactively extinguishing the pain once it’s experienced. They can embrace their natural essence and take on a role in the system that reflects who they really are. Because the role protectors take on is a type of burden also. In most cases, protectors readily take on new roles after the unburdening of the exile. However, less frequently, complete integration requires healing of the protector. The healing process of a protector is the same as that of healing an exile. The protector will need witnessing and unburdening before it can take on a new role in the system.	С изменениями в бывшей изгнанной части защитникам больше не нужно реагировать активно, контролируя нашу жизнь, чтобы уберечь нас от боли изгнанника, или реактивно подавлять боль, как только она ощущается. Они могут принять свою природную сущность и взять на себя роль в системе, которая отражает то, кем они являются на самом деле. Потому что роль защитников – это тоже своего рода бремя. В большинстве случаев защитники с готовностью берут на себя новые роли после освобождения изгнанника. Однако реже для полной интеграции требуется исцеление защитника. Процесс исцеления защитника такой же, как и исцеления изгнанника. Защитнику потребуется свидетельствовать и освободиться от бремени, прежде чем он сможет взять на себя новую роль в системе.	With the changes in the formerly exiled part, protectors no longer need to respond proactively by controlling our lives to keep us safe from the pain of the exile or reactively extinguishing the pain once it’s experienced. They can embrace their natural essence and take on a role in the system that reflects who they really are. Because the role protectors take on is a type of burden also. In most cases, protectors readily take on new roles after the unburdening of the exile. However, less frequently, complete integration requires healing of the protector. The healing process of a protector is the same as that of healing an exile. The protector will need witnessing and unburdening before it can take on a new role in the system.
IFS CONCEPT 2: INTENTION	IFS CONCEPT 2: INTENTION	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: НАМЕРЕНИЕ	IFS CONCEPT 2: INTENTION
Exiled parts have been hidden away for a long time and have held negative beliefs about themselves and/or the world for years. The transformation that happens with the unburdening of these beliefs requires reinforcement. This is accomplished by setting an intention with the recently unburdened part. We want to connect with this part daily for 30 days following the unburdening. The reason for the daily connection is to deepen the relationship between the part and Self, to help maintain the positive changes and new roles, and to decrease the chances of the part reverting to its old beliefs or becoming burdened again. We also need to check with the part to discover how it wants to maintain connection with Self. It may desire a particular type of interaction. We then make a commitment to honor the daily check-in and any ways the part wants to remain connected. This is the final step in the healing process.	Exiled parts have been hidden away for a long time and have held negative beliefs about themselves and/or the world for years. The transformation that happens with the unburdening of these beliefs requires reinforcement. This is accomplished by setting an intention with the recently unburdened part. We want to connect with this part daily for 30 days following the unburdening. The reason for the daily connection is to deepen the relationship between the part and Self, to help maintain the positive changes and new roles, and to decrease the chances of the part reverting to its old beliefs or becoming burdened again. We also need to check with the part to discover how it wants to maintain connection with Self. It may desire a particular type of interaction. We then make a commitment to honor the daily check-in and any ways the part wants to remain connected. This is the final step in the healing process.	Изгнанные части долгое время прятались и годами сохраняли негативные убеждения о себе и/или мире. Трансформация, которая происходит с освобождением от бремени этих убеждений, требует подкрепления. Это достигается путем установления намерения относительно недавно освобожденной от бремени части. Мы хотим соединяться с этой частью ежедневно в течение 30 дней после освобождения. Целью ежедневной связи является углубление отношений между частью и «Я», помощь в сохранении позитивных изменений и новых ролей, а также уменьшение шансов того, что часть вернется к своим старым убеждениям или снова станет обремененной. Нам также необходимо проверить часть, чтобы выяснить, как она хочет поддерживать связь с «Я». Он может желать определенного типа взаимодействия. Затем мы берем на себя обязательство соблюдать ежедневную проверку и любые способы, которыми часть хочет оставаться на связи. Это последний шаг в процессе исцеления.	Exiled parts have been hidden away for a long time and have held negative beliefs about themselves and/or the world for years. The transformation that happens with the unburdening of these beliefs requires reinforcement. This is accomplished by setting an intention with the recently unburdened part. We want to connect with this part daily for 30 days following the unburdening. The reason for the daily connection is to deepen the relationship between the part and Self, to help maintain the positive changes and new roles, and to decrease the chances of the part reverting to its old beliefs or becoming burdened again. We also need to check with the part to discover how it wants to maintain connection with Self. It may desire a particular type of interaction. We then make a commitment to honor the daily check-in and any ways the part wants to remain connected. This is the final step in the healing process.
IFS CONCEPT 3: UPDATING	IFS CONCEPT 3: UPDATING	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 3: ОБНОВЛЕНИЕ	IFS CONCEPT 3: UPDATING
Updating is a skill used when protectors believe you are the same age or close to the age you were when they took on their job of protection. Even though you are older, have taken on many responsibilities, and have had other life challenges and successes, these parts continue to view you as a vulnerable young child that needs their protection. We update parts by sharing with them what has happened in your life since whatever age or time they are stuck in. This can be accomplished by sharing images from various times in your life, playing the movie of your life for the part, or simply telling them. I’ve had clients offer photos from their life to support what they’ve told the part. An example of updating is shared in the case vignette that follows.	Updating is a skill used when protectors believe you are the same age or close to the age you were when they took on their job of protection. Even though you are older, have taken on many responsibilities, and have had other life challenges and successes, these parts continue to view you as a vulnerable young child that needs their protection. We update parts by sharing with them what has happened in your life since whatever age or time they are stuck in. This can be accomplished by sharing images from various times in your life, playing the movie of your life for the part, or simply telling them. I’ve had clients offer photos from their life to support what they’ve told the part. An example of updating is shared in the case vignette that follows.	Обновление — это навык, который используется, когда защитники считают, что вы того же возраста или почти того же возраста, в котором вы были, когда они взяли на себя работу по защите. Даже несмотря на то, что вы старше, взяли на себя много обязанностей и имели другие жизненные проблемы и успехи, эти части продолжают рассматривать вас как уязвимого маленького ребенка, который нуждается в их защите. Мы обновляем части, делясь с ними тем, что произошло в вашей жизни с тех пор, как в каком бы возрасте или времени они ни находились. Этого можно достичь, делясь изображениями из разных периодов вашей жизни, проигрывая фильм из вашей жизни для этой роли или просто рассказывая их. У меня были клиенты, которые предлагали фотографии из своей жизни, чтобы подтвердить то, что они рассказали. Пример обновления приведен в приведенном ниже описании дела.	Updating is a skill used when protectors believe you are the same age or close to the age you were when they took on their job of protection. Even though you are older, have taken on many responsibilities, and have had other life challenges and successes, these parts continue to view you as a vulnerable young child that needs their protection. We update parts by sharing with them what has happened in your life since whatever age or time they are stuck in. This can be accomplished by sharing images from various times in your life, playing the movie of your life for the part, or simply telling them. I’ve had clients offer photos from their life to support what they’ve told the part. An example of updating is shared in the case vignette that follows.
Case Vignette: The Replacement Child	Case Vignette: The Replacement Child	Пример из дела: «Замещающий ребенок»	Case Vignette: The Replacement Child
Autumn is a Black woman in her early 30s with a thriving entrepreneurial business in the spirituality/self-care sector. She came to me for business coaching when she found herself stuck in analysis paralysis around expanding her business. She pursued each new idea with gusto. The problem was that new ideas were ever-present, which kept her chasing the newest one with no forward movement overall. She wavered between growing her current business and rebranding in a new direction.	Autumn is a Black woman in her early 30s with a thriving entrepreneurial business in the spirituality/self-care sector. She came to me for business coaching when she found herself stuck in analysis paralysis around expanding her business. She pursued each new idea with gusto. The problem was that new ideas were ever-present, which kept her chasing the newest one with no forward movement overall. She wavered between growing her current business and rebranding in a new direction.	Отэм — чернокожая женщина чуть старше 30 лет, имеющая процветающий предпринимательский бизнес в сфере духовности и ухода за собой. Она пришла ко мне на бизнес-коучинг, когда обнаружила, что застряла в аналитическом параличе, связанном с расширением своего бизнеса. Она с энтузиазмом реализовывала каждую новую идею. Проблема заключалась в том, что новые идеи присутствовали постоянно, что заставляло ее гоняться за новейшими, не продвигаясь в целом. Она колебалась между развитием своего текущего бизнеса и ребрендингом в новом направлении.	Autumn is a Black woman in her early 30s with a thriving entrepreneurial business in the spirituality/self-care sector. She came to me for business coaching when she found herself stuck in analysis paralysis around expanding her business. She pursued each new idea with gusto. The problem was that new ideas were ever-present, which kept her chasing the newest one with no forward movement overall. She wavered between growing her current business and rebranding in a new direction.
As we worked with her system related to her business, we found three parts were involved in her indecision. She had a part that was anxious about changing what had been successful. Another part felt unworthy of success, so it created roadblocks to movement in a new direction. The third part felt resentment toward the anxious and unworthy parts for their indecision regarding business matters. It also felt resentment for the mistreatment of the exile part they all protected. We discovered this was an exile called The Replacement Child.	As we worked with her system related to her business, we found three parts were involved in her indecision. She had a part that was anxious about changing what had been successful. Another part felt unworthy of success, so it created roadblocks to movement in a new direction. The third part felt resentment toward the anxious and unworthy parts for their indecision regarding business matters. It also felt resentment for the mistreatment of the exile part they all protected. We discovered this was an exile called The Replacement Child.	Работая с ее системой, связанной с ее бизнесом, мы обнаружили, что ее нерешительность связана с тремя частями. У нее была часть, которая беспокоилась об изменении того, что было успешным. Другая часть почувствовала себя недостойной успеха и создала препятствия для движения в новом направлении. Третья часть чувствовала обиду на беспокойных и недостойных частей за их нерешительность в деловых вопросах. Он также чувствовал негодование по поводу плохого обращения с изгнанной частью, которую они все защищали. Мы обнаружили, что это был изгнанник под названием «Замещающий ребенок».	As we worked with her system related to her business, we found three parts were involved in her indecision. She had a part that was anxious about changing what had been successful. Another part felt unworthy of success, so it created roadblocks to movement in a new direction. The third part felt resentment toward the anxious and unworthy parts for their indecision regarding business matters. It also felt resentment for the mistreatment of the exile part they all protected. We discovered this was an exile called The Replacement Child.
When the protector who was experiencing resentment was quite young, it learned that Autumn’s mother had experienced the loss of another child before Autumn was born. As a young child, she believed it was her job to make her mother happy. She did not feel free to develop an identity separate from what her mother wanted or needed. However, she did not receive the attention she needed in return; she felt like an “afterthought.” She was often left alone, which meant she had to figure things out by herself. She grew up feeling “insignificant and discarded.” Although she lived in a household with extended family, no one seemed to have time for her. She noticed her family members were consumed with health, financial, and relationship problems. The Replacement Child was exiled to keep her and the system from the pain of feeling unworthy of love and attention.	When the protector who was experiencing resentment was quite young, it learned that Autumn’s mother had experienced the loss of another child before Autumn was born. As a young child, she believed it was her job to make her mother happy. She did not feel free to develop an identity separate from what her mother wanted or needed. However, she did not receive the attention she needed in return; she felt like an “afterthought.” She was often left alone, which meant she had to figure things out by herself. She grew up feeling “insignificant and discarded.” Although she lived in a household with extended family, no one seemed to have time for her. She noticed her family members were consumed with health, financial, and relationship problems. The Replacement Child was exiled to keep her and the system from the pain of feeling unworthy of love and attention.	Когда испытывавший обиду защитник был совсем юным, он узнал, что мать Отэм пережила потерю еще одного ребенка еще до рождения Отэм. В детстве она считала, что ее работа — сделать свою мать счастливой. Она не чувствовала себя свободной развивать свою личность отдельно от того, чего хотела или в чем нуждалась ее мать. Однако взамен она не получила необходимого ей внимания; она чувствовала себя «запоздалой мыслью». Ее часто оставляли одну, а это означало, что ей приходилось во всем разбираться самой. Она выросла, чувствуя себя «незначительной и отвергнутой». Хотя она жила в большой семье, казалось, ни у кого не было на нее времени. Она заметила, что члены ее семьи были поглощены проблемами со здоровьем, финансами и отношениями. Замещающий Ребенок был изгнан, чтобы уберечь ее и систему от боли от чувства недостойности любви и внимания.	When the protector who was experiencing resentment was quite young, it learned that Autumn’s mother had experienced the loss of another child before Autumn was born. As a young child, she believed it was her job to make her mother happy. She did not feel free to develop an identity separate from what her mother wanted or needed. However, she did not receive the attention she needed in return; she felt like an “afterthought.” She was often left alone, which meant she had to figure things out by herself. She grew up feeling “insignificant and discarded.” Although she lived in a household with extended family, no one seemed to have time for her. She noticed her family members were consumed with health, financial, and relationship problems. The Replacement Child was exiled to keep her and the system from the pain of feeling unworthy of love and attention.
When the protectors allowed access to the exile for healing, through witnessing, we learned The Replacement Child felt extremely lonely. She believed she was not a priority for anyone. She experienced her family from the perspective of an ignored observer, not a beloved member. When she did receive attention, she experienced it as what little they had “left over” and “never as a priority.” She learned self-sufficiency out of necessity because when she sought attention or help, her family told her she was okay and brushed her away. This part needed someone to comfort and guide her. She didn’t understand a lot about the lives of the adults she lived with. She was confused by their unwillingness to help her, and she was unprepared to handle the many tasks and decisions that were left to her.	When the protectors allowed access to the exile for healing, through witnessing, we learned The Replacement Child felt extremely lonely. She believed she was not a priority for anyone. She experienced her family from the perspective of an ignored observer, not a beloved member. When she did receive attention, she experienced it as what little they had “left over” and “never as a priority.” She learned self-sufficiency out of necessity because when she sought attention or help, her family told her she was okay and brushed her away. This part needed someone to comfort and guide her. She didn’t understand a lot about the lives of the adults she lived with. She was confused by their unwillingness to help her, and she was unprepared to handle the many tasks and decisions that were left to her.	Когда защитники позволили изгнаннику получить исцеление, благодаря свидетельству мы узнали, что «Замещающий ребенок» чувствовал себя чрезвычайно одиноким. Она считала, что ни для кого не является приоритетом. Она смотрела на свою семью с точки зрения игнорируемого наблюдателя, а не любимого члена семьи. Когда она получала внимание, она воспринимала это как то немногое, что у них «осталось», и «никогда не было приоритетом». Она научилась самодостаточности по необходимости, потому что, когда она искала внимания или помощи, ее семья говорила ей, что с ней все в порядке, и отмахивалась от нее. Этой части нужен был кто-то, кто утешит и направит ее. Она мало что понимала в жизни взрослых, с которыми жила. Ее смутило их нежелание помочь ей, и она была не готова справиться со многими задачами и решениями, которые были оставлены на ее усмотрение.	When the protectors allowed access to the exile for healing, through witnessing, we learned The Replacement Child felt extremely lonely. She believed she was not a priority for anyone. She experienced her family from the perspective of an ignored observer, not a beloved member. When she did receive attention, she experienced it as what little they had “left over” and “never as a priority.” She learned self-sufficiency out of necessity because when she sought attention or help, her family told her she was okay and brushed her away. This part needed someone to comfort and guide her. She didn’t understand a lot about the lives of the adults she lived with. She was confused by their unwillingness to help her, and she was unprepared to handle the many tasks and decisions that were left to her.
Upon witnessing The Replacement Child’s story, Autumn’s Self offered the comfort, guidance, and validation she had needed long ago. Experiencing the calm, compassion, and connection of Self began the healing process for this part. She felt understood, which increased her trust of Autumn.	Upon witnessing The Replacement Child’s story, Autumn’s Self offered the comfort, guidance, and validation she had needed long ago. Experiencing the calm, compassion, and connection of Self began the healing process for this part. She felt understood, which increased her trust of Autumn.	Став свидетелем истории Замещающего Ребенка, «Я» Отэм предложило ей утешение, руководство и поддержку, в которых она нуждалась давным-давно. Ощущение спокойствия, сострадания и связи с «Я» положило начало процессу исцеления этой части. Она почувствовала, что ее понимают, и это увеличило ее доверие к Отэм.	Upon witnessing The Replacement Child’s story, Autumn’s Self offered the comfort, guidance, and validation she had needed long ago. Experiencing the calm, compassion, and connection of Self began the healing process for this part. She felt understood, which increased her trust of Autumn.
The burdens of The Replacement Child were aloneness, lack of connection, the need to pretend she was stronger than she was and knew more than she did, and the belief she was unworthy of care. After she was unburdened, she invited in the qualities of worthiness, connectedness, innocence, confidence, and an openness to try new things.	The burdens of The Replacement Child were aloneness, lack of connection, the need to pretend she was stronger than she was and knew more than she did, and the belief she was unworthy of care. After she was unburdened, she invited in the qualities of worthiness, connectedness, innocence, confidence, and an openness to try new things.	Бремя «Замещающего ребенка» заключалось в одиночестве, отсутствии связи, необходимости притворяться, что она сильнее, чем была на самом деле, и знала больше, чем на самом деле, а также вера в то, что она недостойна заботы. После того, как она освободилась от бремени, она проявила качества достоинства, связи, невинности, уверенности и открытости, чтобы пробовать что-то новое.	The burdens of The Replacement Child were aloneness, lack of connection, the need to pretend she was stronger than she was and knew more than she did, and the belief she was unworthy of care. After she was unburdened, she invited in the qualities of worthiness, connectedness, innocence, confidence, and an openness to try new things.
The integration step involved inviting the parts that felt anxious, unworthy, and resentful to see the transformation of The Replacement Child and take on new roles in the system. The anxious one expressed concern about this, while the other two recognized there was no need for continued protection and wanted to adopt new roles. Autumn spent time with the anxious one listening to its fears that “wildness” might be created within the system because the newly unburdened one would want to experience new things. It feared that in the quest for novelty, the newly unburdened part would become overwhelmed, the way she had as a child. With this information, I wondered if the anxious part knew that Autumn was an adult now. I asked Autumn to check.	The integration step involved inviting the parts that felt anxious, unworthy, and resentful to see the transformation of The Replacement Child and take on new roles in the system. The anxious one expressed concern about this, while the other two recognized there was no need for continued protection and wanted to adopt new roles. Autumn spent time with the anxious one listening to its fears that “wildness” might be created within the system because the newly unburdened one would want to experience new things. It feared that in the quest for novelty, the newly unburdened part would become overwhelmed, the way she had as a child. With this information, I wondered if the anxious part knew that Autumn was an adult now. I asked Autumn to check.	Шаг интеграции заключался в том, чтобы предложить частям, которые чувствовали тревогу, недостойность и обиду, увидеть трансформацию Замещающего Ребенка и взять на себя новые роли в системе. Встревоженный один выразил обеспокоенность по этому поводу, в то время как двое других признали, что нет необходимости в постоянной защите, и хотели взять на себя новые роли. Осень проводила время с тревожным человеком, выслушивая его опасения, что внутри системы может возникнуть «дикость», потому что недавно освободившийся от бремени человек захочет испытать что-то новое. Она боялась, что в поисках новизны недавно освободившаяся от бремени часть окажется перегружена, как это было с ней в детстве. Получив эту информацию, я задался вопросом, знала ли обеспокоенная часть, что Отем теперь взрослая. Я попросил Отэм проверить.	The integration step involved inviting the parts that felt anxious, unworthy, and resentful to see the transformation of The Replacement Child and take on new roles in the system. The anxious one expressed concern about this, while the other two recognized there was no need for continued protection and wanted to adopt new roles. Autumn spent time with the anxious one listening to its fears that “wildness” might be created within the system because the newly unburdened one would want to experience new things. It feared that in the quest for novelty, the newly unburdened part would become overwhelmed, the way she had as a child. With this information, I wondered if the anxious part knew that Autumn was an adult now. I asked Autumn to check.
“How old do you think I am?” Autumn asked the anxious part.	“How old do you think I am?” Autumn asked the anxious part.	— Как ты думаешь, сколько мне лет? – спросила тревожная часть Осень.	“How old do you think I am?” Autumn asked the anxious part.
“Four,” the anxious one answered.	“Four,” the anxious one answered.	«Четыре», — ответил встревоженный.	“Four,” the anxious one answered.
Laughing, Autumn said, “I’m thirty.” Then she said to me, “The part looks shocked.”	Laughing, Autumn said, “I’m thirty.” Then she said to me, “The part looks shocked.”	Смеясь, Отэм сказала: «Мне тридцать». Затем она сказала мне: «Эта часть выглядит шокированной».	Laughing, Autumn said, “I’m thirty.” Then she said to me, “The part looks shocked.”
“Ask the part if it would like to know what’s happened in your life since you were four.”	“Ask the part if it would like to know what’s happened in your life since you were four.”	«Спроси часть, хочет ли она знать, что произошло в твоей жизни с тех пор, как тебе исполнилось четыре года».	“Ask the part if it would like to know what’s happened in your life since you were four.”
The part wanted to know, and Autumn chose to show highlights of her life in movie form. When that was complete, Autumn shared that the part expressed amazement about her accomplishments and how well she handled the many decisions in her life, both the joyous and the challenging ones. Once the part understood Autumn’s capabilities, it was eager to relinquish its role of protecting her.	The part wanted to know, and Autumn chose to show highlights of her life in movie form. When that was complete, Autumn shared that the part expressed amazement about her accomplishments and how well she handled the many decisions in her life, both the joyous and the challenging ones. Once the part understood Autumn’s capabilities, it was eager to relinquish its role of protecting her.	Роль хотела знать, и Отэм решила показать самые яркие моменты своей жизни в виде фильма. Когда это было завершено, Отэм поделилась, что в этой части выражалось удивление по поводу ее достижений и того, насколько хорошо она справлялась со многими решениями в своей жизни, как радостными, так и сложными. Как только эта часть поняла возможности Отем, она захотела отказаться от своей роли по ее защите.	The part wanted to know, and Autumn chose to show highlights of her life in movie form. When that was complete, Autumn shared that the part expressed amazement about her accomplishments and how well she handled the many decisions in her life, both the joyous and the challenging ones. Once the part understood Autumn’s capabilities, it was eager to relinquish its role of protecting her.
Integration involved the anxious one taking on the role of effortlessness. It wanted to bring ease in times of change and decision-making instead of anxiety and concern. The part that felt unworthy decided to transform into warmth, charm, and an inviting nature. The part that held resentment about Autumn’s treatment as a child instantly released its resentment when it saw the other parts’ transformation. Holding resentment for decades had been an exhausting burden, and this part chose to rest.	Integration involved the anxious one taking on the role of effortlessness. It wanted to bring ease in times of change and decision-making instead of anxiety and concern. The part that felt unworthy decided to transform into warmth, charm, and an inviting nature. The part that held resentment about Autumn’s treatment as a child instantly released its resentment when it saw the other parts’ transformation. Holding resentment for decades had been an exhausting burden, and this part chose to rest.	Интеграция предполагала, что тревожный человек примет на себя роль непринужденности. Он хотел принести легкость во времена перемен и принятия решений, а не тревогу и беспокойство. Та часть, которая чувствовала себя недостойной, решила трансформироваться в теплоту, очарование и манящую натуру. Та часть, которая возмущалась обращением с Отем в детстве, мгновенно выпустила свое негодование, когда увидела трансформацию других частей. Сдерживать обиду на протяжении десятилетий было изнурительным бременем, и эта часть предпочла отдохнуть.	Integration involved the anxious one taking on the role of effortlessness. It wanted to bring ease in times of change and decision-making instead of anxiety and concern. The part that felt unworthy decided to transform into warmth, charm, and an inviting nature. The part that held resentment about Autumn’s treatment as a child instantly released its resentment when it saw the other parts’ transformation. Holding resentment for decades had been an exhausting burden, and this part chose to rest.
After the protectors took on new roles, Autumn’s Self set intentions with The Replacement Child. The part wanted to remain connected to Autumn by bringing more freedom of choice into the system. She felt empowered to experience new things because she wanted to and not because she had no choice but to do them. Autumn agreed to check in with this part daily to see how she was doing and if she needed anything from her.	After the protectors took on new roles, Autumn’s Self set intentions with The Replacement Child. The part wanted to remain connected to Autumn by bringing more freedom of choice into the system. She felt empowered to experience new things because she wanted to and not because she had no choice but to do them. Autumn agreed to check in with this part daily to see how she was doing and if she needed anything from her.	После того, как защитники взяли на себя новые роли, «Я Отэм» определило намерения создать «Замену ребенка». Часть хотела сохранить связь с Отэм, привнося в систему больше свободы выбора. Она чувствовала себя уполномоченной испытать что-то новое, потому что хотела этого, а не потому, что у нее не было другого выбора, кроме как делать это. Отэм согласилась ежедневно проверять эту часть, чтобы узнать, как у нее дела и нужно ли ей что-нибудь от нее.	After the protectors took on new roles, Autumn’s Self set intentions with The Replacement Child. The part wanted to remain connected to Autumn by bringing more freedom of choice into the system. She felt empowered to experience new things because she wanted to and not because she had no choice but to do them. Autumn agreed to check in with this part daily to see how she was doing and if she needed anything from her.
The changes in Autumn’s internal system translated to changes in her decision-making abilities. Her protectors were free to act as advisors in decisions about the business. Their input was no longer motivated by the fear of a vulnerable part upsetting the system. Autumn described her internal transformation in one session this way: “My parts are quieter and calmer. I don’t feel conflicted in my decisions. I have clarity I didn’t have before. My parts trust me to decide, and instead of blocking me, they point out important things they don’t want me to miss.” Ultimately, Autumn and her parts decided on a both/and decision instead of an either/or. She decided to incorporate the best aspects of her current business with her new vision.	The changes in Autumn’s internal system translated to changes in her decision-making abilities. Her protectors were free to act as advisors in decisions about the business. Their input was no longer motivated by the fear of a vulnerable part upsetting the system. Autumn described her internal transformation in one session this way: “My parts are quieter and calmer. I don’t feel conflicted in my decisions. I have clarity I didn’t have before. My parts trust me to decide, and instead of blocking me, they point out important things they don’t want me to miss.” Ultimately, Autumn and her parts decided on a both/and decision instead of an either/or. She decided to incorporate the best aspects of her current business with her new vision.	Изменения во внутренней системе Отем привели к изменениям в ее способности принимать решения. Ее покровители могли свободно выступать в качестве советников при принятии решений по поводу бизнеса. Их вклад больше не был мотивирован страхом, что уязвимая часть нарушит работу системы. Отэм так описала свою внутреннюю трансформацию за один сеанс: «Мои части стали тише и спокойнее. Я не чувствую противоречий в своих решениях. У меня появилась ясность, которой у меня не было раньше. Мои части доверяют мне принимать решения, и вместо того, чтобы блокировать меня, они указывают на важные вещи, которые они не хотят, чтобы я пропустил». В конечном итоге Отем и ее части приняли решение «и/и» вместо «или/или». Она решила объединить лучшие аспекты своего нынешнего бизнеса со своим новым видением.	The changes in Autumn’s internal system translated to changes in her decision-making abilities. Her protectors were free to act as advisors in decisions about the business. Their input was no longer motivated by the fear of a vulnerable part upsetting the system. Autumn described her internal transformation in one session this way: “My parts are quieter and calmer. I don’t feel conflicted in my decisions. I have clarity I didn’t have before. My parts trust me to decide, and instead of blocking me, they point out important things they don’t want me to miss.” Ultimately, Autumn and her parts decided on a both/and decision instead of an either/or. She decided to incorporate the best aspects of her current business with her new vision.
I want to note that once parts are unburdened, whether they are protectors or exiles, they are no longer referred to as protectors, managers, firefighters, or exiles—as you may have noticed while reading this chapter. They are simply parts. Although they may have names or qualities they prefer, they no longer carry the labels reserved for burdened parts in their extreme roles.	I want to note that once parts are unburdened, whether they are protectors or exiles, they are no longer referred to as protectors, managers, firefighters, or exiles—as you may have noticed while reading this chapter. They are simply parts. Although they may have names or qualities they prefer, they no longer carry the labels reserved for burdened parts in their extreme roles.	Я хочу отметить, что как только части освобождаются от бремени, будь то защитники или изгнанники, их больше не называют защитниками, менеджерами, пожарными или изгнанниками, как вы, возможно, заметили, читая эту главу. Это просто части. Хотя у них могут быть имена или качества, которые они предпочитают, они больше не носят ярлыков, предназначенных для отягощенных частей в своих крайних ролях.	I want to note that once parts are unburdened, whether they are protectors or exiles, they are no longer referred to as protectors, managers, firefighters, or exiles—as you may have noticed while reading this chapter. They are simply parts. Although they may have names or qualities they prefer, they no longer carry the labels reserved for burdened parts in their extreme roles.
Meditation: Trailblazer	Meditation: Trailblazer	Медитация: Первопроходец	Meditation: Trailblazer
The Trailblazer meditation is the result of my therapy work with a few of my parts around being the first Black IFS lead trainer. I hadn’t achieved the goal when I created the meditation, but I was in progress. Being the only or first Black person to (fill in the blank) was quite familiar to me; however, I had parts that pushed through and didn’t allow me to attend to other parts who had insecurities and anxieties. IFS gave me the means to meet these parts and address their needs. The experience of getting to know my “Role Model” part gave birth to the Trailblazer meditation.	The Trailblazer meditation is the result of my therapy work with a few of my parts around being the first Black IFS lead trainer. I hadn’t achieved the goal when I created the meditation, but I was in progress. Being the only or first Black person to (fill in the blank) was quite familiar to me; however, I had parts that pushed through and didn’t allow me to attend to other parts who had insecurities and anxieties. IFS gave me the means to meet these parts and address their needs. The experience of getting to know my “Role Model” part gave birth to the Trailblazer meditation.	Медитация «Первопроходец» — это результат моей терапевтической работы, в которой некоторые из моих частей были связаны с тем, что я был первым ведущим тренером Black IFS. Я не достиг цели, когда создавал медитацию, но я находился в процессе. Быть единственным или первым чернокожим человеком, который (заполнил пробел), было мне вполне знакомо; однако у меня были части, которые прорывались и не позволяли мне уделять внимание другим частям, у которых были неуверенность и тревога. IFS предоставила мне средства для удовлетворения этих потребностей и удовлетворения их потребностей. Опыт знакомства с моей частью «Образца для подражания» породил медитацию «Первопроходец».	The Trailblazer meditation is the result of my therapy work with a few of my parts around being the first Black IFS lead trainer. I hadn’t achieved the goal when I created the meditation, but I was in progress. Being the only or first Black person to (fill in the blank) was quite familiar to me; however, I had parts that pushed through and didn’t allow me to attend to other parts who had insecurities and anxieties. IFS gave me the means to meet these parts and address their needs. The experience of getting to know my “Role Model” part gave birth to the Trailblazer meditation.
This meditation is useful when starting a new project or goal and setting intentions with newly unburdened parts.	This meditation is useful when starting a new project or goal and setting intentions with newly unburdened parts.	Эта медитация полезна, когда вы начинаете новый проект или ставите цель и устанавливаете намерения относительно недавно освобожденных от бремени частей.	This meditation is useful when starting a new project or goal and setting intentions with newly unburdened parts.
Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.	Закройте глаза или смягчите взгляд.	Close your eyes or soften your gaze.
Adjust your body until it feels comfortable.	Adjust your body until it feels comfortable.	Регулируйте свое тело, пока оно не почувствует себя комфортно.	Adjust your body until it feels comfortable.
Notice how your body connects with the surface that supports you.	Notice how your body connects with the surface that supports you.	Обратите внимание, как ваше тело соединяется с поверхностью, которая вас поддерживает.	Notice how your body connects with the surface that supports you.
Inhale from the bottom of your feet, bringing the breath up through your body.	Inhale from the bottom of your feet, bringing the breath up through your body.	Вдохните из ступней, поднимая дыхание через тело.	Inhale from the bottom of your feet, bringing the breath up through your body.
Exhale through your body and out the bottom of your feet.	Exhale through your body and out the bottom of your feet.	Выдохните через тело и через ступни.	Exhale through your body and out the bottom of your feet.
Do that a few times.	Do that a few times.	Сделайте это несколько раз.	Do that a few times.
Find yourself on the path of the new trail you’re blazing.	Find yourself on the path of the new trail you’re blazing.	Окажитесь на пути нового пути, который вы прокладываете.	Find yourself on the path of the new trail you’re blazing.
As you walk this path, allow your senses to take in what’s around you.	As you walk this path, allow your senses to take in what’s around you.	Идя по этому пути, позвольте своим чувствам воспринимать то, что вас окружает.	As you walk this path, allow your senses to take in what’s around you.
As you meander, you meet your eager, helpful parts.	As you meander, you meet your eager, helpful parts.	По мере того, как вы блуждаете, вы встречаете свои нетерпеливые и полезные части.	As you meander, you meet your eager, helpful parts.
Take time with them and learn what they want to share with you about this journey.	Take time with them and learn what they want to share with you about this journey.	Уделите время вместе с ними и узнайте, чем они хотят поделиться с вами об этом путешествии.	Take time with them and learn what they want to share with you about this journey.
When your time with them is complete, you walk farther on the path, meeting your concerned and fearful parts.	When your time with them is complete, you walk farther on the path, meeting your concerned and fearful parts.	Когда ваше время с ними закончится, вы пойдете дальше по пути, встречая свои обеспокоенные и испуганные части.	When your time with them is complete, you walk farther on the path, meeting your concerned and fearful parts.
Sitting with them, you listen curiously to their fears and concerns.	Sitting with them, you listen curiously to their fears and concerns.	Сидя рядом с ними, вы с любопытством слушаете их страхи и опасения.	Sitting with them, you listen curiously to their fears and concerns.
After your time with these parts, you travel your path until you come to a clearing.	After your time with these parts, you travel your path until you come to a clearing.	Проведя время с этими частями, вы путешествуете по своему пути, пока не выйдете на поляну.	After your time with these parts, you travel your path until you come to a clearing.
In this clearing, you see qualities that will help you succeed on your path.	In this clearing, you see qualities that will help you succeed on your path.	На этом прояснении вы видите качества, которые помогут вам добиться успеха на вашем пути.	In this clearing, you see qualities that will help you succeed on your path.
You sit with these qualities, listening to their wisdom about your path and how they may assist you.	You sit with these qualities, listening to their wisdom about your path and how they may assist you.	Вы сидите с этими качествами, слушая их мудрость о вашем пути и о том, как они могут вам помочь.	You sit with these qualities, listening to their wisdom about your path and how they may assist you.
These qualities encourage you to set intentions for your path.	These qualities encourage you to set intentions for your path.	Эти качества побуждают вас ставить перед собой цели.	These qualities encourage you to set intentions for your path.
Take as much time as you need to set clear intentions for moving forward.	Take as much time as you need to set clear intentions for moving forward.	Уделите столько времени, сколько вам нужно, чтобы сформулировать четкие намерения двигаться вперед.	Take as much time as you need to set clear intentions for moving forward.
Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.	Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.	Направьте свое осознание на свое дыхание и дышите, возвращаясь в этот момент и пространство. Медленно откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Bring your awareness to your breath and breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you’re ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: Trailblazer Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Trailblazer Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Вопросы для журнала «Первопроходец»	Exercise 2: Trailblazer Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Trailblazer meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Trailblazer meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы выполнили медитацию «Первопроходец» и написали быстрый «Захват журнала», потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое изучение, отвечая на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Trailblazer meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
What is the new path you’re blazing?	What is the new path you’re blazing?	Какой новый путь вы прокладываете?	What is the new path you’re blazing?
How are your eager parts trying to assist you?	How are your eager parts trying to assist you?	Как ваши нетерпеливые части пытаются вам помочь?	How are your eager parts trying to assist you?
What’s the message from your concerned or fearful parts?	What’s the message from your concerned or fearful parts?	Что посылают ваши обеспокоенные или испуганные части?	What’s the message from your concerned or fearful parts?
What are the qualities you met in the clearing?	What are the qualities you met in the clearing?	Какие качества вы встретили на поляне?	What are the qualities you met in the clearing?
What intentions did you set?	What intentions did you set?	Какие намерения вы поставили перед собой?	What intentions did you set?
How will these qualities assist you on your path?	How will these qualities assist you on your path?	Как эти качества помогут вам на вашем пути?	How will these qualities assist you on your path?
Exercise 3: 30-Day Parts Check-In	Exercise 3: 30-Day Parts Check-In	Упражнение 3. 30-дневная проверка запасных частей	Exercise 3: 30-Day Parts Check-In
Daily check-ins with newly unburdened parts are very important to the healing process. Use the following questions to connect with your part every day for 30 days after an unburdening.	Daily check-ins with newly unburdened parts are very important to the healing process. Use the following questions to connect with your part every day for 30 days after an unburdening.	Ежедневные проверки вновь освободившихся частей тела очень важны для процесса заживления. Используйте следующие вопросы, чтобы соединиться со своей частью каждый день в течение 30 дней после освобождения от бремени.	Daily check-ins with newly unburdened parts are very important to the healing process. Use the following questions to connect with your part every day for 30 days after an unburdening.
How do you notice the part?	How do you notice the part?	Как вы замечаете эту часть?	How do you notice the part?
How do you feel toward the part? If it’s other than a C-word, ask that part to unblend.	How do you feel toward the part? If it’s other than a C-word, ask that part to unblend.	Как вы относитесь к этой роли? Если это не слово на букву C, попросите эту часть раствориться.	How do you feel toward the part? If it’s other than a C-word, ask that part to unblend.
Check how the part is doing since the unburdening or since you last checked in.	Check how the part is doing since the unburdening or since you last checked in.	Проверьте, как работает деталь с момента снятия нагрузки или с момента последней проверки.	Check how the part is doing since the unburdening or since you last checked in.
What does the part want you to know?	What does the part want you to know?	Что эта часть хочет, чтобы вы знали?	What does the part want you to know?
Is there anything you want to share with the part?	Is there anything you want to share with the part?	Есть ли что-нибудь, чем вы хотите поделиться с этой частью?	Is there anything you want to share with the part?
Check if the part needs anything from you.	Check if the part needs anything from you.	Проверьте, не нужно ли детали что-нибудь от вас.	Check if the part needs anything from you.
CHAPTER 13	CHAPTER 13	ГЛАВА 13	CHAPTER 13
Labyrinth with the Ancestor	Labyrinth with the Ancestor	Лабиринт с Предком	Labyrinth with the Ancestor
A Self-Led Life	A Self-Led Life	Самостоятельная жизнь	A Self-Led Life
Self is who I am when parts are not blended with me. I express through the qualities of compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, confidence, courage, clarity, and creativity. When parts trust me, I can lead the system in a heart-centered, wise, intuitive manner. More than anything, I want to heal the wounded parts so they can return to their natural state, expressing their essential talents and gifts. They were never meant to carry these burdens, and I want to heal them by releasing them. I tend to lead with connection, compassion, and curiosity. Connection because I want parts to know they are not alone and that I care for them. Compassion because I want them to feel and know that I will not judge them. I have the capacity to hold their pain, no matter how great or enduring. Curiosity because I want to listen. I am open to hear as much as they want to share with me. I want to understand what they have gone through. I desire for them to experience being seen fully. Yet all of this is an offering; everyone inside has the choice to interact with me or not. I move at their pace and in their time.	Self is who I am when parts are not blended with me. I express through the qualities of compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, confidence, courage, clarity, and creativity. When parts trust me, I can lead the system in a heart-centered, wise, intuitive manner. More than anything, I want to heal the wounded parts so they can return to their natural state, expressing their essential talents and gifts. They were never meant to carry these burdens, and I want to heal them by releasing them. I tend to lead with connection, compassion, and curiosity. Connection because I want parts to know they are not alone and that I care for them. Compassion because I want them to feel and know that I will not judge them. I have the capacity to hold their pain, no matter how great or enduring. Curiosity because I want to listen. I am open to hear as much as they want to share with me. I want to understand what they have gone through. I desire for them to experience being seen fully. Yet all of this is an offering; everyone inside has the choice to interact with me or not. I move at their pace and in their time.	Я — это тот, кто я есть, когда части не сливаются со мной. Я выражаю через качества сострадания, любопытства, спокойствия, связности, уверенности, смелости, ясности и творчества. Когда части доверяют мне, я могу руководить системой сердечно, мудро и интуитивно. Больше всего на свете я хочу исцелить раненые части тела, чтобы они могли вернуться в свое естественное состояние, проявляя свои основные таланты и дарования. Они никогда не были предназначены для того, чтобы нести это бремя, и я хочу исцелить их, освободив от них. Я склонен руководить, используя связь, сострадание и любопытство. Связь, потому что я хочу, чтобы части знали, что они не одиноки и что я забочусь о них. Сострадание, потому что я хочу, чтобы они почувствовали и знали, что я не буду их осуждать. У меня есть способность сдерживать их боль, какой бы сильной и продолжительной она ни была. Любопытство, потому что я хочу слушать. Я открыт услышать столько, чем они хотят поделиться со мной. Я хочу понять, через что им пришлось пройти. Я хочу, чтобы они почувствовали, что меня видят в полной мере. Однако все это — подношение; у каждого внутри есть выбор, взаимодействовать со мной или нет. Я двигаюсь в их темпе и в их время.	Self is who I am when parts are not blended with me. I express through the qualities of compassion, curiosity, calm, connectedness, confidence, courage, clarity, and creativity. When parts trust me, I can lead the system in a heart-centered, wise, intuitive manner. More than anything, I want to heal the wounded parts so they can return to their natural state, expressing their essential talents and gifts. They were never meant to carry these burdens, and I want to heal them by releasing them. I tend to lead with connection, compassion, and curiosity. Connection because I want parts to know they are not alone and that I care for them. Compassion because I want them to feel and know that I will not judge them. I have the capacity to hold their pain, no matter how great or enduring. Curiosity because I want to listen. I am open to hear as much as they want to share with me. I want to understand what they have gone through. I desire for them to experience being seen fully. Yet all of this is an offering; everyone inside has the choice to interact with me or not. I move at their pace and in their time.
I have created a Self-to-part relationship with each of my parts shared in this book. Remember Carefree, the part who took on the burden of pleasing others? She exiled and protected the part of herself who didn’t feel valued and was told to change. Carefree did change, becoming what she thought others wanted her to be. Carefree trusted me to help the part of her that she exiled who felt not good enough in her natural state. When this part was healed, Carefree could release her compulsion to please others and express her innate qualities. Pleasing others became a choice instead of an obligation.	I have created a Self-to-part relationship with each of my parts shared in this book. Remember Carefree, the part who took on the burden of pleasing others? She exiled and protected the part of herself who didn’t feel valued and was told to change. Carefree did change, becoming what she thought others wanted her to be. Carefree trusted me to help the part of her that she exiled who felt not good enough in her natural state. When this part was healed, Carefree could release her compulsion to please others and express her innate qualities. Pleasing others became a choice instead of an obligation.	Я создал отношения «Я-часть» с каждой из моих частей, представленных в этой книге. Помните Беззаботную, ту часть, которая взяла на себя бремя доставлять удовольствие другим? Она изгоняла и защищала ту часть себя, которая не чувствовала себя ценной и которой было приказано измениться. Беззаботная действительно изменилась, став такой, какой, по ее мнению, ее хотели видеть другие. Беззаботная доверила мне помочь той части себя, которую она изгнала и которая чувствовала себя недостаточно хорошо в своем естественном состоянии. Когда эта часть была исцелена, Беззаботная смогла освободиться от своего принуждения угождать другим и проявить свои врожденные качества. Угождать другим стало выбором, а не обязанностью.	I have created a Self-to-part relationship with each of my parts shared in this book. Remember Carefree, the part who took on the burden of pleasing others? She exiled and protected the part of herself who didn’t feel valued and was told to change. Carefree did change, becoming what she thought others wanted her to be. Carefree trusted me to help the part of her that she exiled who felt not good enough in her natural state. When this part was healed, Carefree could release her compulsion to please others and express her innate qualities. Pleasing others became a choice instead of an obligation.
Antsy is another protector who was open to a relationship with me. She had been around for a very long time and created anxiety and panic related to success and achievement. She had a strong alliance with Perfection. These two parts protected an exile part who believed she was unlovable because she fell short of her father’s expectations. After coming into relationship with me, both parts relaxed significantly. They allowed access to the exile, who released her burdensome beliefs. Antsy decided to keep her name but change her role to alert the system when we’re taking on too much. She’s the one who questions whether we need to take on new projects and/or responsibilities. Perfection was eager to release her burden too. She realized how stifling the pursuit of perfection was and that she never could achieve it. She embraced what her mother told her years ago and began to measure her progress and effort based on whether it was her best, recognizing that her “best” changes based on internal and external circumstances.	Antsy is another protector who was open to a relationship with me. She had been around for a very long time and created anxiety and panic related to success and achievement. She had a strong alliance with Perfection. These two parts protected an exile part who believed she was unlovable because she fell short of her father’s expectations. After coming into relationship with me, both parts relaxed significantly. They allowed access to the exile, who released her burdensome beliefs. Antsy decided to keep her name but change her role to alert the system when we’re taking on too much. She’s the one who questions whether we need to take on new projects and/or responsibilities. Perfection was eager to release her burden too. She realized how stifling the pursuit of perfection was and that she never could achieve it. She embraced what her mother told her years ago and began to measure her progress and effort based on whether it was her best, recognizing that her “best” changes based on internal and external circumstances.	Энси — еще один защитник, который был открыт для отношений со мной. Она существовала очень долго и вызывала тревогу и панику, связанную с успехом и достижениями. У нее был крепкий союз с Совершенством. Эти две части защищали часть изгнанника, которая считала ее непривлекательной, потому что она не оправдала ожиданий своего отца. После установления отношений со мной обе стороны значительно расслабились. Они разрешили доступ к изгнаннице, освободившей ее от тягостных убеждений. Анси решила сохранить свое имя, но изменить свою роль, чтобы предупреждать систему, когда мы берем на себя слишком много работы. Именно она задается вопросом, нужно ли нам брать на себя новые проекты и/или обязанности. Совершенство тоже стремилось облегчить свое бремя. Она осознала, насколько удушающим было стремление к совершенству и что она никогда не сможет его достичь. Она приняла то, что ее мать сказала ей много лет назад, и начала измерять свой прогресс и усилия, основываясь на том, было ли это для нее лучшим, признавая, что ее «лучшие» изменения зависят от внутренних и внешних обстоятельств.	Antsy is another protector who was open to a relationship with me. She had been around for a very long time and created anxiety and panic related to success and achievement. She had a strong alliance with Perfection. These two parts protected an exile part who believed she was unlovable because she fell short of her father’s expectations. After coming into relationship with me, both parts relaxed significantly. They allowed access to the exile, who released her burdensome beliefs. Antsy decided to keep her name but change her role to alert the system when we’re taking on too much. She’s the one who questions whether we need to take on new projects and/or responsibilities. Perfection was eager to release her burden too. She realized how stifling the pursuit of perfection was and that she never could achieve it. She embraced what her mother told her years ago and began to measure her progress and effort based on whether it was her best, recognizing that her “best” changes based on internal and external circumstances.
I learned a lot in building a relationship with Pricklee. Although there were other parts who did not understand what they viewed as her extreme irritation when she didn’t get her way or the unexpected happened, her behavior made perfect sense once I heard her story. In fact, this was true for each of my parts. Once I learned how and why they took on their roles, their behavior was understandable. I also came to understand and appreciate that their roles were taken on when they were very young, with limited life experience, and they truly were doing the best they could.	I learned a lot in building a relationship with Pricklee. Although there were other parts who did not understand what they viewed as her extreme irritation when she didn’t get her way or the unexpected happened, her behavior made perfect sense once I heard her story. In fact, this was true for each of my parts. Once I learned how and why they took on their roles, their behavior was understandable. I also came to understand and appreciate that their roles were taken on when they were very young, with limited life experience, and they truly were doing the best they could.	Я многому научился, строя отношения с Прикли. Хотя были и другие части, которые не понимали, что они считали ее крайним раздражением, когда она не добивалась своего или происходило непредвиденное, ее поведение приобрело смысл, когда я услышал ее историю. Фактически, это было верно для каждой из моих частей. Как только я узнал, как и почему они взяли на себя свои роли, их поведение стало понятным. Я также понял и оценил, что их роли были взяты на себя, когда они были очень молоды, с ограниченным жизненным опытом, и они действительно делали все, что могли.	I learned a lot in building a relationship with Pricklee. Although there were other parts who did not understand what they viewed as her extreme irritation when she didn’t get her way or the unexpected happened, her behavior made perfect sense once I heard her story. In fact, this was true for each of my parts. Once I learned how and why they took on their roles, their behavior was understandable. I also came to understand and appreciate that their roles were taken on when they were very young, with limited life experience, and they truly were doing the best they could.
I believe my relationship with Pricklee and Shhhh created the greatest internal shift. I say this because my intuition was heightened with access to Shhhh’s innate intuition. Pricklee relaxed and began to trust Shhhh and me. As I continue to check in with both, intuition and knowing increase within my system. Pricklee has a new perspective about the unexpected. She no longer attempts to control things. She accepts that what is happening is exactly what needs to happen. Instead of bracing and attempting to control what she cannot, she brings calm and insight to these situations, and she leans in to the intuition of Shhhh to determine what needs to happen next. Often what’s needed is time in quiet and stillness. Quite the opposite of how Pricklee responded in the past.	I believe my relationship with Pricklee and Shhhh created the greatest internal shift. I say this because my intuition was heightened with access to Shhhh’s innate intuition. Pricklee relaxed and began to trust Shhhh and me. As I continue to check in with both, intuition and knowing increase within my system. Pricklee has a new perspective about the unexpected. She no longer attempts to control things. She accepts that what is happening is exactly what needs to happen. Instead of bracing and attempting to control what she cannot, she brings calm and insight to these situations, and she leans in to the intuition of Shhhh to determine what needs to happen next. Often what’s needed is time in quiet and stillness. Quite the opposite of how Pricklee responded in the past.	Я считаю, что мои отношения с Прикли и Тссс создали величайший внутренний сдвиг. Я говорю это потому, что моя интуиция обострилась благодаря доступу к врожденной интуиции Шшшш. Прикли расслабился и начал доверять Шшшш и мне. По мере того, как я продолжаю проверять и то, и другое, интуиция и знание в моей системе возрастают. У Прикли новый взгляд на неожиданное. Она больше не пытается контролировать ситуацию. Она признает, что происходящее — это именно то, что должно произойти. Вместо того, чтобы напрягаться и пытаться контролировать то, что она не может, она привносит спокойствие и понимание в эти ситуации и опирается на интуицию «Тсссс», чтобы определить, что должно произойти дальше. Часто то, что необходимо, — это время в тишине и тишине. Совершенно противоположно тому, как Прикли реагировал в прошлом.	I believe my relationship with Pricklee and Shhhh created the greatest internal shift. I say this because my intuition was heightened with access to Shhhh’s innate intuition. Pricklee relaxed and began to trust Shhhh and me. As I continue to check in with both, intuition and knowing increase within my system. Pricklee has a new perspective about the unexpected. She no longer attempts to control things. She accepts that what is happening is exactly what needs to happen. Instead of bracing and attempting to control what she cannot, she brings calm and insight to these situations, and she leans in to the intuition of Shhhh to determine what needs to happen next. Often what’s needed is time in quiet and stillness. Quite the opposite of how Pricklee responded in the past.
I was most enlightened by the parts that used my back injury to communicate with me. Parts came close to considering surgery as an option for the debilitating back pain I experienced that was still negatively impacting my life decades after the car accident I described earlier. When I learned that parts could use an injury or illness to express themselves, I became quite curious to know if this could be what was going on with me. It turned out that it was. The change in the level of pain once I got to know the parts involved is nothing short of miraculous.	I was most enlightened by the parts that used my back injury to communicate with me. Parts came close to considering surgery as an option for the debilitating back pain I experienced that was still negatively impacting my life decades after the car accident I described earlier. When I learned that parts could use an injury or illness to express themselves, I became quite curious to know if this could be what was going on with me. It turned out that it was. The change in the level of pain once I got to know the parts involved is nothing short of miraculous.	Больше всего меня заинтересовали те части тела, которые использовали травму спины для связи со мной. Партс был близок к тому, чтобы рассматривать операцию как вариант лечения изнурительной боли в спине, которую я испытывал и которая все еще негативно влияла на мою жизнь спустя десятилетия после автомобильной аварии, которую я описал ранее. Когда я узнал, что части тела могут использовать травму или болезнь для самовыражения, мне стало очень любопытно узнать, может ли это происходить со мной. Оказалось, что это так. Изменение уровня боли после того, как я узнал о задействованных частях тела, стало не чем иным, как чудом.	I was most enlightened by the parts that used my back injury to communicate with me. Parts came close to considering surgery as an option for the debilitating back pain I experienced that was still negatively impacting my life decades after the car accident I described earlier. When I learned that parts could use an injury or illness to express themselves, I became quite curious to know if this could be what was going on with me. It turned out that it was. The change in the level of pain once I got to know the parts involved is nothing short of miraculous.
I discovered some parts were in the deepest denial of how much raising a child with special needs was impacting my family and my mental and physical health, while other parts kept pushing to find the right doctor, medicine, school, or program that would heal her. There were also parts who felt shame about how ineffective they were as a mother. When the internal chaos became unbearable, parts activated the pain centers in my lower back. This usually incapacitated me, requiring painkillers and bed rest, since I felt searing, shooting back pain any time I moved.	I discovered some parts were in the deepest denial of how much raising a child with special needs was impacting my family and my mental and physical health, while other parts kept pushing to find the right doctor, medicine, school, or program that would heal her. There were also parts who felt shame about how ineffective they were as a mother. When the internal chaos became unbearable, parts activated the pain centers in my lower back. This usually incapacitated me, requiring painkillers and bed rest, since I felt searing, shooting back pain any time I moved.	Я обнаружил, что некоторые части находились в самом глубоком отрицании того, насколько сильно воспитание ребенка с особыми потребностями влияло на мою семью, мое психическое и физическое здоровье, в то время как другие части продолжали искать подходящего врача, лекарство, школу или программу, которые могли бы исцелить ее. . Были также части, которым было стыдно за то, насколько они неэффективны как матери. Когда внутренний хаос стал невыносимым, некоторые части активировали болевые центры в пояснице. Обычно это выводило меня из строя, требуя обезболивающих и постельного режима, поскольку я чувствовал жгучую, стреляющую боль в спине каждый раз, когда двигался.	I discovered some parts were in the deepest denial of how much raising a child with special needs was impacting my family and my mental and physical health, while other parts kept pushing to find the right doctor, medicine, school, or program that would heal her. There were also parts who felt shame about how ineffective they were as a mother. When the internal chaos became unbearable, parts activated the pain centers in my lower back. This usually incapacitated me, requiring painkillers and bed rest, since I felt searing, shooting back pain any time I moved.
Once I came into relationship with the pain parts, I learned they were the response to the five-alarm fire going on inside. It took some time and many therapy sessions, but I was able to befriend the parts that felt denial, self-rage, rejection, and shame, and I was able to heal them. When this happened, the pain literally went away. I have been completely free of back pain since working with this coalition of parts.	Once I came into relationship with the pain parts, I learned they were the response to the five-alarm fire going on inside. It took some time and many therapy sessions, but I was able to befriend the parts that felt denial, self-rage, rejection, and shame, and I was able to heal them. When this happened, the pain literally went away. I have been completely free of back pain since working with this coalition of parts.	Как только я вступил во взаимоотношения с частями боли, я понял, что они являются реакцией на пожар пяти тревог, происходящий внутри. Это заняло некоторое время и множество сеансов терапии, но я смог подружиться с теми частями, которые чувствовали отрицание, гнев на себя, неприятие и стыд, и смог их исцелить. Когда это произошло, боль буквально ушла. С тех пор, как я начал работать с этой коалицией частей, у меня совершенно не было болей в спине.	Once I came into relationship with the pain parts, I learned they were the response to the five-alarm fire going on inside. It took some time and many therapy sessions, but I was able to befriend the parts that felt denial, self-rage, rejection, and shame, and I was able to heal them. When this happened, the pain literally went away. I have been completely free of back pain since working with this coalition of parts.
In the chapter on polarization, we met Survive and Thrive. These parts were polarized around a decision to either close my private therapy practice and work full-time on becoming an IFS trainer or continue to juggle both. When Survive and Thrive gave me permission to heal the exile they protected who believed she was unworthy and unlovable unless she was achieving, they were able to give up their roles after she was unburdened. They have transformed from bickering adversaries to collaborative advisors, especially on decisions related to my business.	In the chapter on polarization, we met Survive and Thrive. These parts were polarized around a decision to either close my private therapy practice and work full-time on becoming an IFS trainer or continue to juggle both. When Survive and Thrive gave me permission to heal the exile they protected who believed she was unworthy and unlovable unless she was achieving, they were able to give up their roles after she was unburdened. They have transformed from bickering adversaries to collaborative advisors, especially on decisions related to my business.	В главе о поляризации мы познакомились с принципом «Выжить и процветать». Эти части были поляризованы вокруг решения либо закрыть мою частную терапевтическую практику и работать полный рабочий день, чтобы стать тренером IFS, либо продолжать совмещать и то, и другое. Когда Survive and Thrive разрешили мне исцелить изгнанницу, которую они защищали, которая считала ее недостойной и непривлекательной, если она не добивалась успехов, они смогли отказаться от своих ролей после того, как она освободилась от бремени. Из ссорящихся противников они превратились в совместных советников, особенно по решениям, связанным с моим бизнесом.	In the chapter on polarization, we met Survive and Thrive. These parts were polarized around a decision to either close my private therapy practice and work full-time on becoming an IFS trainer or continue to juggle both. When Survive and Thrive gave me permission to heal the exile they protected who believed she was unworthy and unlovable unless she was achieving, they were able to give up their roles after she was unburdened. They have transformed from bickering adversaries to collaborative advisors, especially on decisions related to my business.
The last part to revisit is Cry Baby. Many parts within my system did not like the sensitivity of Cry Baby. They took on the voices of those in her life who admonished her tears and sensitive nature. In hearing Cry Baby’s story, I came to understand that her sensitivity is a gift and is needed within the system. Being seen and valued for being herself encouraged her to release her burdens and reclaim her birthright. Her sensitivity is a type of wisdom. She has awareness and knowing that doesn’t originate in her mind or brain, but through her senses and beyond. She feels and experiences the world, people, situations, and interactions deeply. Her view on crying has changed. She sees her tears as her superpower instead of her weakness. She is confident enough to express vulnerability in front of others and no longer apologizes for it. She believes by being comfortable enough to express her vulnerability openly, she gives others permission to accept and express their vulnerability too.	The last part to revisit is Cry Baby. Many parts within my system did not like the sensitivity of Cry Baby. They took on the voices of those in her life who admonished her tears and sensitive nature. In hearing Cry Baby’s story, I came to understand that her sensitivity is a gift and is needed within the system. Being seen and valued for being herself encouraged her to release her burdens and reclaim her birthright. Her sensitivity is a type of wisdom. She has awareness and knowing that doesn’t originate in her mind or brain, but through her senses and beyond. She feels and experiences the world, people, situations, and interactions deeply. Her view on crying has changed. She sees her tears as her superpower instead of her weakness. She is confident enough to express vulnerability in front of others and no longer apologizes for it. She believes by being comfortable enough to express her vulnerability openly, she gives others permission to accept and express their vulnerability too.	Последняя часть, к которой стоит вернуться, — это Cry Baby. Многим частям моей системы не понравилась чувствительность Cry Baby. Они взяли на себя голоса тех, кто в ее жизни упрекал ее слезы и чувствительную натуру. Услышав историю Плаксы, я понял, что ее чувствительность — это дар, который необходим системе. То, что ее видели и ценили за то, что она была самой собой, побудило ее освободиться от своего бремени и вернуть себе право первородства. Ее чувствительность — это своего рода мудрость. У нее есть осознание и знание, которые возникают не в ее разуме или мозгу, а через ее чувства и за их пределами. Она глубоко чувствует и переживает мир, людей, ситуации и взаимодействия. Ее взгляд на плач изменился. Она считает свои слезы своей суперсилой, а не слабостью. Она достаточно уверена в себе, чтобы выразить свою уязвимость перед другими, и больше не извиняется за это. Она считает, что, чувствуя себя достаточно комфортно, чтобы открыто выражать свою уязвимость, она дает другим разрешение тоже принять и выразить свою уязвимость.	The last part to revisit is Cry Baby. Many parts within my system did not like the sensitivity of Cry Baby. They took on the voices of those in her life who admonished her tears and sensitive nature. In hearing Cry Baby’s story, I came to understand that her sensitivity is a gift and is needed within the system. Being seen and valued for being herself encouraged her to release her burdens and reclaim her birthright. Her sensitivity is a type of wisdom. She has awareness and knowing that doesn’t originate in her mind or brain, but through her senses and beyond. She feels and experiences the world, people, situations, and interactions deeply. Her view on crying has changed. She sees her tears as her superpower instead of her weakness. She is confident enough to express vulnerability in front of others and no longer apologizes for it. She believes by being comfortable enough to express her vulnerability openly, she gives others permission to accept and express their vulnerability too.
A question that often comes up, especially for folks who move through the world in Black and brown bodies, is, “How do parts remain Self-led if the external circumstances do not change?” There is an idea that if those external constraints still exist, protector parts will have to re-engage their extreme behaviors for protection. To explore this, let’s go back to the vignette of Angel in Chapter 7. Her work environment did not change. Her boss continued to make racist comments and Angel endured daily microaggressions. She had to make a living, and although she did start looking for a new job outside her current organization, she did not find one during our time together. So how did her system cope?	A question that often comes up, especially for folks who move through the world in Black and brown bodies, is, “How do parts remain Self-led if the external circumstances do not change?” There is an idea that if those external constraints still exist, protector parts will have to re-engage their extreme behaviors for protection. To explore this, let’s go back to the vignette of Angel in Chapter 7. Her work environment did not change. Her boss continued to make racist comments and Angel endured daily microaggressions. She had to make a living, and although she did start looking for a new job outside her current organization, she did not find one during our time together. So how did her system cope?	Часто возникает вопрос, особенно у людей, которые движутся по миру в черных и коричневых телах: «Как части остаются самостоятельными, если внешние обстоятельства не меняются?» Существует идея, что, если эти внешние ограничения все еще существуют, частям-защитникам придется вновь использовать свое экстремальное поведение для защиты. Чтобы изучить это, давайте вернемся к эпизоду с Ангелом в главе 7. Ее рабочая среда не изменилась. Ее босс продолжал делать расистские комментарии, а Анхель ежедневно терпела микроагрессии. Ей нужно было зарабатывать на жизнь, и хотя она начала искать новую работу за пределами своей нынешней организации, за время нашей совместной жизни она так и не нашла ее. Так как же справилась ее система?	A question that often comes up, especially for folks who move through the world in Black and brown bodies, is, “How do parts remain Self-led if the external circumstances do not change?” There is an idea that if those external constraints still exist, protector parts will have to re-engage their extreme behaviors for protection. To explore this, let’s go back to the vignette of Angel in Chapter 7. Her work environment did not change. Her boss continued to make racist comments and Angel endured daily microaggressions. She had to make a living, and although she did start looking for a new job outside her current organization, she did not find one during our time together. So how did her system cope?
When Angel’s parts Go Along to Get Along, Bulldog, and the exiled part they protected were unburdened, her protectors took on new roles. Their roles involved them protecting her in Self-led ways instead of from a position of no choice. These parts helped Angel recognize she had a valuable skill set and encouraged her to reach out to a recruiter. While Angel waited for a new employment opportunity, these parts came to understand that they could not work hard enough, long enough, or take on enough extra work to change her boss’s mind about people of color. So they stopped trying, which was a Self-led decision. Parts can still protect us without being the burdened protectors.	When Angel’s parts Go Along to Get Along, Bulldog, and the exiled part they protected were unburdened, her protectors took on new roles. Their roles involved them protecting her in Self-led ways instead of from a position of no choice. These parts helped Angel recognize she had a valuable skill set and encouraged her to reach out to a recruiter. While Angel waited for a new employment opportunity, these parts came to understand that they could not work hard enough, long enough, or take on enough extra work to change her boss’s mind about people of color. So they stopped trying, which was a Self-led decision. Parts can still protect us without being the burdened protectors.	Когда части Ангела «Идут вместе, чтобы ладить», Бульдог и изгнанная часть, которую они защищали, освободились от бремени, ее защитники взяли на себя новые роли. Их роли заключались в том, что они защищали ее самостоятельно, а не с позиции отсутствия выбора. Эти детали помогли Энджел осознать, что у нее есть ценный набор навыков, и побудили ее обратиться к рекрутеру. Пока Энджел ждала новой возможности трудоустройства, эти части пришли к пониманию того, что они не могут работать достаточно усердно, достаточно долго или брать на себя достаточно дополнительной работы, чтобы изменить мнение ее босса о цветных людях. Поэтому они прекратили попытки, что было самостоятельным решением. Части все еще могут защищать нас, не будучи обремененными защитниками.	When Angel’s parts Go Along to Get Along, Bulldog, and the exiled part they protected were unburdened, her protectors took on new roles. Their roles involved them protecting her in Self-led ways instead of from a position of no choice. These parts helped Angel recognize she had a valuable skill set and encouraged her to reach out to a recruiter. While Angel waited for a new employment opportunity, these parts came to understand that they could not work hard enough, long enough, or take on enough extra work to change her boss’s mind about people of color. So they stopped trying, which was a Self-led decision. Parts can still protect us without being the burdened protectors.
IFS CONCEPT 1: THE U-TURN	IFS CONCEPT 1: THE U-TURN	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 1: РАЗВОРОТ	IFS CONCEPT 1: THE U-TURN
Outside of the core concepts of Self and parts, I have found the U-turn is one of the most powerful and beneficial concepts of IFS. A common response to parts becoming triggered is to blame the activation, discomfort, or upset on something or someone outside of ourselves. The U-turn gives us the opportunity to pause and see what’s going on inside. When we get activated or triggered, we can U-turn by first noticing that we are triggered, and instead of blaming the situation or person for the activation, we can turn inward to see who got triggered and why. The activating event is probably similar to something hurtful or even traumatic from our past. Our parts respond to the activating event as if it were the same as that past event, or as if we were re-experiencing the actual event. It’s only by making the U-turn that we give ourselves space to explore what is happening inside. The more access to Self-energy in a system, the easier it is to U-turn.	Outside of the core concepts of Self and parts, I have found the U-turn is one of the most powerful and beneficial concepts of IFS. A common response to parts becoming triggered is to blame the activation, discomfort, or upset on something or someone outside of ourselves. The U-turn gives us the opportunity to pause and see what’s going on inside. When we get activated or triggered, we can U-turn by first noticing that we are triggered, and instead of blaming the situation or person for the activation, we can turn inward to see who got triggered and why. The activating event is probably similar to something hurtful or even traumatic from our past. Our parts respond to the activating event as if it were the same as that past event, or as if we were re-experiencing the actual event. It’s only by making the U-turn that we give ourselves space to explore what is happening inside. The more access to Self-energy in a system, the easier it is to U-turn.	Помимо основных концепций «Я» и частей, я обнаружил, что разворот — одна из самых мощных и полезных концепций IFS. Обычной реакцией на срабатывание частей является обвинение в активации, дискомфорте или расстройстве чего-то или кого-то вне нас самих. Разворот дает нам возможность остановиться и посмотреть, что происходит внутри. Когда мы активируемся или запускаемся, мы можем развернуться, сначала заметив, что мы активированы, и вместо того, чтобы обвинять ситуацию или человека в активации, мы можем обратиться внутрь себя, чтобы увидеть, кто сработал и почему. Активирующее событие, вероятно, похоже на что-то обидное или даже травмирующее из нашего прошлого. Наши части реагируют на активирующее событие так, как если бы оно было таким же, как и прошлое событие, или как если бы мы заново переживали настоящее событие. Только делая разворот, мы даем себе пространство для исследования того, что происходит внутри. Чем больше доступа к собственной энергии в системе, тем легче развернуться.	Outside of the core concepts of Self and parts, I have found the U-turn is one of the most powerful and beneficial concepts of IFS. A common response to parts becoming triggered is to blame the activation, discomfort, or upset on something or someone outside of ourselves. The U-turn gives us the opportunity to pause and see what’s going on inside. When we get activated or triggered, we can U-turn by first noticing that we are triggered, and instead of blaming the situation or person for the activation, we can turn inward to see who got triggered and why. The activating event is probably similar to something hurtful or even traumatic from our past. Our parts respond to the activating event as if it were the same as that past event, or as if we were re-experiencing the actual event. It’s only by making the U-turn that we give ourselves space to explore what is happening inside. The more access to Self-energy in a system, the easier it is to U-turn.
IFS CONCEPT 2: SELF-LEADERSHIP	IFS CONCEPT 2: SELF-LEADERSHIP	КОНЦЕПЦИЯ IFS 2: САМОЛИДЕРСТВО	IFS CONCEPT 2: SELF-LEADERSHIP
Richard Schwartz and Martha Sweezy’s classic text states that the goal of IFS therapy is to release parts from their extreme roles and beliefs to increase internal Self-leadership, to achieve balance and harmony in the system, and to bring Self-energy to external systems.1 For Self to lead, Self, not parts, must be in the seat of consciousness. Self-leadership happens readily when parts unblend. It is the natural result of parts releasing their extreme roles. Self-leadership opens the system to choose. Burdened parts do not have a choice. They act in their extreme roles out of necessity. Many parts aren’t even aware of alternatives. When Self leads, it can be with parts; it can reparent them when needed and provide internal and external guidance. The only hindrance to Self-leadership is parts’ inability or unwillingness to unblend. When parts unblend, Self naturally steps forward as the leader of the system. As parts come into relationship with Self and experience compassionate and confident leadership, they unblend more readily, further deepening their trust in Self to lead. Unburdened parts, whether they were in the role of protector or exile, now have increased access to Self-energy and can return to their natural state of being, creating balance and harmony in the system. A less burdened, balanced, harmonious, and Self-led system can interact with external systems in a Self-led way, bringing the qualities of Self (curiosity, confidence, creativity, clarity, compassion, connectedness, and calm) to each new interaction.	Richard Schwartz and Martha Sweezy’s classic text states that the goal of IFS therapy is to release parts from their extreme roles and beliefs to increase internal Self-leadership, to achieve balance and harmony in the system, and to bring Self-energy to external systems.1 For Self to lead, Self, not parts, must be in the seat of consciousness. Self-leadership happens readily when parts unblend. It is the natural result of parts releasing their extreme roles. Self-leadership opens the system to choose. Burdened parts do not have a choice. They act in their extreme roles out of necessity. Many parts aren’t even aware of alternatives. When Self leads, it can be with parts; it can reparent them when needed and provide internal and external guidance. The only hindrance to Self-leadership is parts’ inability or unwillingness to unblend. When parts unblend, Self naturally steps forward as the leader of the system. As parts come into relationship with Self and experience compassionate and confident leadership, they unblend more readily, further deepening their trust in Self to lead. Unburdened parts, whether they were in the role of protector or exile, now have increased access to Self-energy and can return to their natural state of being, creating balance and harmony in the system. A less burdened, balanced, harmonious, and Self-led system can interact with external systems in a Self-led way, bringing the qualities of Self (curiosity, confidence, creativity, clarity, compassion, connectedness, and calm) to each new interaction.	В классическом тексте Ричарда Шварца и Марты Суизи говорится, что цель терапии IFS состоит в том, чтобы освободить части от их крайних ролей и убеждений, чтобы повысить внутреннее Самолидерство, достичь баланса и гармонии в системе и принести Самоэнергию во внешние системы. 1 Чтобы «Я» руководило, «Я», а не части, должно занимать место сознания. Саморуководство легко достигается, когда части не соединяются друг с другом. Это естественный результат того, что части отказываются от своих крайних ролей. Самолидерство открывает систему выбора. У отягощенных частей нет выбора. Они действуют в своих крайних ролях по необходимости. Многие части даже не знают об альтернативах. Когда «Я» ведет, это может быть с частями; при необходимости он может переподчинить их и обеспечить внутреннее и внешнее руководство. Единственным препятствием на пути к Самолидерству является неспособность или нежелание частей объединяться. Когда части разъединяются, Селф естественным образом выходит вперед в качестве лидера системы. По мере того, как части вступают в отношения с «Я» и испытывают сострадательное и уверенное руководство, они с большей готовностью растворяются, еще больше углубляя свою веру в «Я», как лидера. Необремененные части, независимо от того, были ли они в роли защитника или изгнанника, теперь имеют расширенный доступ к Само-энергии и могут вернуться в свое естественное состояние бытия, создавая баланс и гармонию в системе. Менее обремененная, сбалансированная, гармоничная и Самостоятельная система может взаимодействовать с внешними системами Самостоятельно, привнося качества Личности (любознательность, уверенность, креативность, ясность, сострадание, связанность и спокойствие) в каждое новое взаимодействие. .	Richard Schwartz and Martha Sweezy’s classic text states that the goal of IFS therapy is to release parts from their extreme roles and beliefs to increase internal Self-leadership, to achieve balance and harmony in the system, and to bring Self-energy to external systems.1 For Self to lead, Self, not parts, must be in the seat of consciousness. Self-leadership happens readily when parts unblend. It is the natural result of parts releasing their extreme roles. Self-leadership opens the system to choose. Burdened parts do not have a choice. They act in their extreme roles out of necessity. Many parts aren’t even aware of alternatives. When Self leads, it can be with parts; it can reparent them when needed and provide internal and external guidance. The only hindrance to Self-leadership is parts’ inability or unwillingness to unblend. When parts unblend, Self naturally steps forward as the leader of the system. As parts come into relationship with Self and experience compassionate and confident leadership, they unblend more readily, further deepening their trust in Self to lead. Unburdened parts, whether they were in the role of protector or exile, now have increased access to Self-energy and can return to their natural state of being, creating balance and harmony in the system. A less burdened, balanced, harmonious, and Self-led system can interact with external systems in a Self-led way, bringing the qualities of Self (curiosity, confidence, creativity, clarity, compassion, connectedness, and calm) to each new interaction.
Case Vignette 1: Parts-Led Divorce	Case Vignette 1: Parts-Led Divorce	Пример 1: развод по частям	Case Vignette 1: Parts-Led Divorce
At age 42, Diane had two children ages 7 and 14 and her 20-year marriage was ending. She came to therapy to manage her rage. Her husband traveled out of state for work two weeks out of the month. She discovered that while he was away, he lived with another woman and the two young children he had with her. Diane’s raging part spent consecutive sessions erupting and plotting to make him pay for what he did to their family. This rage part was polarized with a part that wailed for entire sessions and incapacitated Diane. She reported spending some days crying uncontrollably and some days plotting and carrying out vengeful actions against her husband. She had yet another part that wanted to report on all the things her husband did and continued to do that hurt her and the children. Diane had little access to Self-energy, so no matter what gains we made in session, they were lost between sessions.	At age 42, Diane had two children ages 7 and 14 and her 20-year marriage was ending. She came to therapy to manage her rage. Her husband traveled out of state for work two weeks out of the month. She discovered that while he was away, he lived with another woman and the two young children he had with her. Diane’s raging part spent consecutive sessions erupting and plotting to make him pay for what he did to their family. This rage part was polarized with a part that wailed for entire sessions and incapacitated Diane. She reported spending some days crying uncontrollably and some days plotting and carrying out vengeful actions against her husband. She had yet another part that wanted to report on all the things her husband did and continued to do that hurt her and the children. Diane had little access to Self-energy, so no matter what gains we made in session, they were lost between sessions.	В 42 года у Дайаны было двое детей 7 и 14 лет, и ее 20-летний брак подходил к концу. Она пришла на терапию, чтобы справиться со своей яростью. Ее муж уезжал за границу на работу две недели в месяц. Она обнаружила, что, пока его не было, он жил с другой женщиной и двумя маленькими детьми, которые у него были от нее. Яростная часть Дайаны проводила последовательные сеансы, вспыхивая и строя заговоры, чтобы заставить его заплатить за то, что он сделал с их семьей. Эта часть ярости была поляризована частью, которая плакала на протяжении всей сессии и выводила Диану из строя. Она сообщила, что несколько дней бесконтрольно плакала, а несколько дней планировала и осуществляла действия против своего мужа. У нее была еще одна часть, которая хотела сообщить обо всем, что делал и продолжал делать ее муж, что причиняло боль ей и детям. У Дианы был ограниченный доступ к Самоэнергии, поэтому каких бы успехов мы ни добились за сеанс, они терялись между сеансами.	At age 42, Diane had two children ages 7 and 14 and her 20-year marriage was ending. She came to therapy to manage her rage. Her husband traveled out of state for work two weeks out of the month. She discovered that while he was away, he lived with another woman and the two young children he had with her. Diane’s raging part spent consecutive sessions erupting and plotting to make him pay for what he did to their family. This rage part was polarized with a part that wailed for entire sessions and incapacitated Diane. She reported spending some days crying uncontrollably and some days plotting and carrying out vengeful actions against her husband. She had yet another part that wanted to report on all the things her husband did and continued to do that hurt her and the children. Diane had little access to Self-energy, so no matter what gains we made in session, they were lost between sessions.
Diane’s raging, vengeful parts tried to discredit her husband to his boss, in their community and their church, and with their children. She withheld the children from visiting him until he was granted a court order, and even then, she didn’t allow visitation until she was held in contempt of court. She accused him of being unfit, which brought Child Protective Services into their lives to supervise his visits until their investigation was completed. Ultimately, CPS ruled Diane’s complaints that her husband was unfit were unfounded. Her raging parts were undeterred; in fact, they gained momentum.	Diane’s raging, vengeful parts tried to discredit her husband to his boss, in their community and their church, and with their children. She withheld the children from visiting him until he was granted a court order, and even then, she didn’t allow visitation until she was held in contempt of court. She accused him of being unfit, which brought Child Protective Services into their lives to supervise his visits until their investigation was completed. Ultimately, CPS ruled Diane’s complaints that her husband was unfit were unfounded. Her raging parts were undeterred; in fact, they gained momentum.	Яростные, мстительные части Дианы пытались дискредитировать ее мужа перед его начальником, в их обществе, в их церкви, а также перед их детьми. Она не позволяла детям посещать его до тех пор, пока он не получил постановление суда, и даже тогда она не разрешала посещения, пока ее не признали неуважением к суду. Она обвинила его в непригодности, что привело к появлению в их жизни Службы защиты детей, которая наблюдала за его посещениями, пока расследование не было завершено. В конечном итоге CPS постановила, что жалобы Дайаны на непригодность ее мужа необоснованны. Ее разъяренные части не испугались; на самом деле, они набрали обороты.	Diane’s raging, vengeful parts tried to discredit her husband to his boss, in their community and their church, and with their children. She withheld the children from visiting him until he was granted a court order, and even then, she didn’t allow visitation until she was held in contempt of court. She accused him of being unfit, which brought Child Protective Services into their lives to supervise his visits until their investigation was completed. Ultimately, CPS ruled Diane’s complaints that her husband was unfit were unfounded. Her raging parts were undeterred; in fact, they gained momentum.
When Diane’s raging parts were most active, she canceled therapy sessions for weeks at a time. She would later share in session the irreparable financial, emotional, and property damage she was causing her husband. She also did everything she could to prolong the divorce proceedings. Diane’s divorce was eventually granted, but her raging, vengeful parts did not stop. Eventually they turned their anger toward me and Diane stopped coming to therapy.	When Diane’s raging parts were most active, she canceled therapy sessions for weeks at a time. She would later share in session the irreparable financial, emotional, and property damage she was causing her husband. She also did everything she could to prolong the divorce proceedings. Diane’s divorce was eventually granted, but her raging, vengeful parts did not stop. Eventually they turned their anger toward me and Diane stopped coming to therapy.	Когда бушующие части Дайаны были наиболее активны, она отменяла сеансы терапии на несколько недель. Позже на сеансе она рассказала о непоправимом финансовом, эмоциональном и имущественном ущербе, который она нанесла своему мужу. Она также сделала все возможное, чтобы затянуть бракоразводный процесс. В конце концов развод Дайаны был удовлетворен, но ее яростные и мстительные чувства не прекратились. В конце концов они обратили свой гнев на меня, и Дайана перестала приходить на терапию.	When Diane’s raging parts were most active, she canceled therapy sessions for weeks at a time. She would later share in session the irreparable financial, emotional, and property damage she was causing her husband. She also did everything she could to prolong the divorce proceedings. Diane’s divorce was eventually granted, but her raging, vengeful parts did not stop. Eventually they turned their anger toward me and Diane stopped coming to therapy.
Case Vignette 2: Self-Led Divorce	Case Vignette 2: Self-Led Divorce	Случай 2: Самостоятельный развод	Case Vignette 2: Self-Led Divorce
Another client, Gemma, was getting a divorce because her husband had cheated on her. Gemma had parts that were sad and angry and “knew better.” Gemma had suspected her husband’s cheating for a few years and questioned him multiple times. Each time she asked, he denied it. Even though she couldn’t prove it, she couldn’t shake the feeling he was lying. Eventually she hired a private detective, who provided the proof in a few weeks: her husband was carrying on multiple affairs and had been for years.	Another client, Gemma, was getting a divorce because her husband had cheated on her. Gemma had parts that were sad and angry and “knew better.” Gemma had suspected her husband’s cheating for a few years and questioned him multiple times. Each time she asked, he denied it. Even though she couldn’t prove it, she couldn’t shake the feeling he was lying. Eventually she hired a private detective, who provided the proof in a few weeks: her husband was carrying on multiple affairs and had been for years.	Другая клиентка, Джемма, собиралась развестись, потому что муж ей изменил. В Джемме были грустные и злые роли, которые «знали лучше». Джемма уже несколько лет подозревала мужа в измене и неоднократно допрашивала его. Каждый раз, когда она спрашивала, он отрицал это. Хотя она не могла этого доказать, она не могла избавиться от ощущения, что он лжет. В конце концов она наняла частного детектива, который за несколько недель предоставил доказательства: у ее мужа было множество романов в течение многих лет.	Another client, Gemma, was getting a divorce because her husband had cheated on her. Gemma had parts that were sad and angry and “knew better.” Gemma had suspected her husband’s cheating for a few years and questioned him multiple times. Each time she asked, he denied it. Even though she couldn’t prove it, she couldn’t shake the feeling he was lying. Eventually she hired a private detective, who provided the proof in a few weeks: her husband was carrying on multiple affairs and had been for years.
Even though Gemma was new to IFS therapy, she had good access to Self. However, she had a Self-like part who wanted to “take the high road.” Taking the high road initially seemed like a Self-led endeavor; however, after learning that the part wanted to prove Gemma was a good person, I understood it was a Self-like part. This part was polarized with the other three parts and believed that if those parts expressed themselves, Gemma would not be seen as a good person by her husband, her divorce attorney, or the judge. We discovered that this part’s need to be seen as good had caused Gemma to accept poor treatment in her marriage, in friendships, and from family members.	Even though Gemma was new to IFS therapy, she had good access to Self. However, she had a Self-like part who wanted to “take the high road.” Taking the high road initially seemed like a Self-led endeavor; however, after learning that the part wanted to prove Gemma was a good person, I understood it was a Self-like part. This part was polarized with the other three parts and believed that if those parts expressed themselves, Gemma would not be seen as a good person by her husband, her divorce attorney, or the judge. We discovered that this part’s need to be seen as good had caused Gemma to accept poor treatment in her marriage, in friendships, and from family members.	Несмотря на то, что Джемма была новичком в терапии IFS, у нее был хороший доступ к Самости. Однако у нее была часть, подобная Самости, которая хотела «пойти по большой дороге». Выбор большой дороги поначалу казался самостоятельным усилием; однако, узнав, что эта часть хотела доказать, что Джемма была хорошим человеком, я понял, что это была Самоподобная часть. Эта часть была поляризована с тремя другими частями и считала, что, если эти части проявят себя, Джемму не сочтут хорошим человеком ни ее муж, ни ее адвокат по бракоразводным процессам, ни судья. Мы обнаружили, что потребность этой части в том, чтобы ее считали хорошей, заставила Джемму мириться с плохим обращением в браке, в дружбе и со стороны членов семьи.	Even though Gemma was new to IFS therapy, she had good access to Self. However, she had a Self-like part who wanted to “take the high road.” Taking the high road initially seemed like a Self-led endeavor; however, after learning that the part wanted to prove Gemma was a good person, I understood it was a Self-like part. This part was polarized with the other three parts and believed that if those parts expressed themselves, Gemma would not be seen as a good person by her husband, her divorce attorney, or the judge. We discovered that this part’s need to be seen as good had caused Gemma to accept poor treatment in her marriage, in friendships, and from family members.
Gemma was committed to her mental and emotional health. She attended sessions as scheduled, actively participated, worked with her parts outside of session, and completed all homework assignments. She even joined an IFS support group for women going through divorce.	Gemma was committed to her mental and emotional health. She attended sessions as scheduled, actively participated, worked with her parts outside of session, and completed all homework assignments. She even joined an IFS support group for women going through divorce.	Джемма заботилась о своем психическом и эмоциональном здоровье. Она посещала занятия по расписанию, активно участвовала в них, работала со своими частями вне занятий и выполняла все домашние задания. Она даже присоединилась к группе поддержки IFS для женщин, переживающих развод.	Gemma was committed to her mental and emotional health. She attended sessions as scheduled, actively participated, worked with her parts outside of session, and completed all homework assignments. She even joined an IFS support group for women going through divorce.
We took time to get to know her sad, angry, “high road,” and “knew better” parts. We discovered that the anger she thought was directed at her husband was really directed at herself because she didn’t listen to the part that was certain of his cheating years ago. Gemma had parts who needed to trust his lies because they were afraid of starting over. She also had parts who thought of ways to hurt him or make him pay, but they never acted on these thoughts; it was more an expression of their anger. Ultimately, Gemma decided to focus on her parts and how what happened in her marriage was not an isolated incident. By coming into relationship with her protectors and unburdening the vulnerable parts, her system became more balanced, with Self leading. Gemma faced the divorce proceedings courageously, standing up for herself and confidently asking for what she wanted without needing to be seen as a good person.	We took time to get to know her sad, angry, “high road,” and “knew better” parts. We discovered that the anger she thought was directed at her husband was really directed at herself because she didn’t listen to the part that was certain of his cheating years ago. Gemma had parts who needed to trust his lies because they were afraid of starting over. She also had parts who thought of ways to hurt him or make him pay, but they never acted on these thoughts; it was more an expression of their anger. Ultimately, Gemma decided to focus on her parts and how what happened in her marriage was not an isolated incident. By coming into relationship with her protectors and unburdening the vulnerable parts, her system became more balanced, with Self leading. Gemma faced the divorce proceedings courageously, standing up for herself and confidently asking for what she wanted without needing to be seen as a good person.	Нам потребовалось время, чтобы познакомиться с ее грустными, злыми, «большими дорогами» и «знающими лучше» сторонами. Мы обнаружили, что гнев, который, как она думала, был направлен на ее мужа, на самом деле был направлен на нее саму, потому что она не слушала ту часть, которая была уверена в его измене много лет назад. У Джеммы были части, которым нужно было поверить в его ложь, потому что они боялись начать все сначала. У нее также были части, которые думали о том, как причинить ему боль или заставить его заплатить, но они никогда не действовали в соответствии с этими мыслями; это было скорее выражением их гнева. В конце концов, Джемма решила сосредоточиться на своих ролях и на том, что то, что произошло в ее браке, не было изолированным инцидентом. Вступив в отношения со своими защитниками и освободив уязвимые части, ее система стала более сбалансированной, во главе с «Я». Джемма мужественно отнеслась к бракоразводному процессу, постояв за себя и уверенно прося того, чего она хотела, не нуждаясь в том, чтобы ее считали хорошим человеком.	We took time to get to know her sad, angry, “high road,” and “knew better” parts. We discovered that the anger she thought was directed at her husband was really directed at herself because she didn’t listen to the part that was certain of his cheating years ago. Gemma had parts who needed to trust his lies because they were afraid of starting over. She also had parts who thought of ways to hurt him or make him pay, but they never acted on these thoughts; it was more an expression of their anger. Ultimately, Gemma decided to focus on her parts and how what happened in her marriage was not an isolated incident. By coming into relationship with her protectors and unburdening the vulnerable parts, her system became more balanced, with Self leading. Gemma faced the divorce proceedings courageously, standing up for herself and confidently asking for what she wanted without needing to be seen as a good person.
Meditation: Labyrinth with the Ancestor	Meditation: Labyrinth with the Ancestor	Медитация: Лабиринт с Предком	Meditation: Labyrinth with the Ancestor
The Labyrinth with the Ancestor meditation is the eighth in the series given to me by my ancestors.	The Labyrinth with the Ancestor meditation is the eighth in the series given to me by my ancestors.	Лабиринт с медитацией Предка — восьмой в серии, подаренной мне предками.	The Labyrinth with the Ancestor meditation is the eighth in the series given to me by my ancestors.
This meditation highlights the ways you’ve experienced Self-leadership and the qualities of Self-leadership in your life.	This meditation highlights the ways you’ve experienced Self-leadership and the qualities of Self-leadership in your life.	Эта медитация подчеркивает способы, которыми вы ощутили Самолидерство, и качества Самолидерства в вашей жизни.	This meditation highlights the ways you’ve experienced Self-leadership and the qualities of Self-leadership in your life.
Bring your attention to your breath.	Bring your attention to your breath.	Перенесите внимание на свое дыхание.	Bring your attention to your breath.
Notice how your breath moves in and out of your body.	Notice how your breath moves in and out of your body.	Обратите внимание, как ваше дыхание входит и выходит из вашего тела.	Notice how your breath moves in and out of your body.
Go inside by closing your eyes, softening your gaze, or whatever feels comfortable for you.	Go inside by closing your eyes, softening your gaze, or whatever feels comfortable for you.	Войдите внутрь, закрыв глаза, смягчив взгляд или сделав что-то еще, что вам удобно.	Go inside by closing your eyes, softening your gaze, or whatever feels comfortable for you.
Visualize yourself walking in a garden. Take in the beauty in every direction. Feel the sun on your face and the fragrance in the air.	Visualize yourself walking in a garden. Take in the beauty in every direction. Feel the sun on your face and the fragrance in the air.	Представьте, что вы гуляете по саду. Наслаждайтесь красотой во всех направлениях. Почувствуйте солнце на своем лице и аромат в воздухе.	Visualize yourself walking in a garden. Take in the beauty in every direction. Feel the sun on your face and the fragrance in the air.
Walking deeper within, you see a tall semicircular hedge.	Walking deeper within, you see a tall semicircular hedge.	Пройдя глубже, вы видите высокую полукруглую изгородь.	Walking deeper within, you see a tall semicircular hedge.
As you get closer, you recognize an Ancestor standing at a door-like opening in the hedge.	As you get closer, you recognize an Ancestor standing at a door-like opening in the hedge.	Подойдя ближе, вы узнаете Предка, стоящего у похожего на дверь проема в живой изгороди.	As you get closer, you recognize an Ancestor standing at a door-like opening in the hedge.
The Ancestor signals you to come with them.	The Ancestor signals you to come with them.	Предок подает вам знак идти с ними.	The Ancestor signals you to come with them.
The Ancestor says, “I have come to guide you through this labyrinth to remind you of the special gifts you carry within you.”	The Ancestor says, “I have come to guide you through this labyrinth to remind you of the special gifts you carry within you.”	Предок говорит: «Я пришел провести тебя через этот лабиринт, чтобы напомнить тебе об особых дарах, которые ты несешь внутри себя».	The Ancestor says, “I have come to guide you through this labyrinth to remind you of the special gifts you carry within you.”
They go on to explain, “Many people confuse a labyrinth with a maze. But unlike a maze, a labyrinth has no dead ends, and you cannot get lost. A labyrinth ends where it begins.	They go on to explain, “Many people confuse a labyrinth with a maze. But unlike a maze, a labyrinth has no dead ends, and you cannot get lost. A labyrinth ends where it begins.	Далее они объясняют: «Многие люди путают лабиринт с лабиринтом. Но в отличие от лабиринта, в лабиринте нет тупиков, и заблудиться невозможно. Лабиринт заканчивается там, где начинается.	They go on to explain, “Many people confuse a labyrinth with a maze. But unlike a maze, a labyrinth has no dead ends, and you cannot get lost. A labyrinth ends where it begins.
The Ancestor lets you know the experience of walking a labyrinth can be very tranquil and assures you that they will accompany you throughout.	The Ancestor lets you know the experience of walking a labyrinth can be very tranquil and assures you that they will accompany you throughout.	Предок сообщает вам, что прогулка по лабиринту может быть очень спокойной, и уверяет, что они будут сопровождать вас повсюду.	The Ancestor lets you know the experience of walking a labyrinth can be very tranquil and assures you that they will accompany you throughout.
You join the Ancestor inside to begin walking the outermost circle of the labyrinth.	You join the Ancestor inside to begin walking the outermost circle of the labyrinth.	Вы присоединяетесь к Предку внутри, чтобы начать идти по внешнему кругу лабиринта.	You join the Ancestor inside to begin walking the outermost circle of the labyrinth.
As you walk together the Ancestor says, “The gift you possess is an inner wisdom consisting of eight qualities. I will ask you to recall examples from your life of how these qualities are already within you.”	As you walk together the Ancestor says, “The gift you possess is an inner wisdom consisting of eight qualities. I will ask you to recall examples from your life of how these qualities are already within you.”	Когда вы идете вместе, Предок говорит: «Дар, которым вы обладаете, — это внутренняя мудрость, состоящая из восьми качеств. Я попрошу вас вспомнить примеры из вашей жизни того, как эти качества уже есть внутри вас».	As you walk together the Ancestor says, “The gift you possess is an inner wisdom consisting of eight qualities. I will ask you to recall examples from your life of how these qualities are already within you.”
The Ancestor says the word Compassion, and right before your eyes you see a movie of the ways you have shown compassion to friends, family, people you love, strangers, and yourself.	The Ancestor says the word Compassion, and right before your eyes you see a movie of the ways you have shown compassion to friends, family, people you love, strangers, and yourself.	Предок произносит слово «Сострадание», и прямо перед вашими глазами вы видите фильм о том, как вы проявили сострадание к друзьям, семье, людям, которых любите, незнакомцам и самому себе.	The Ancestor says the word Compassion, and right before your eyes you see a movie of the ways you have shown compassion to friends, family, people you love, strangers, and yourself.
The two of you walk the second circle, and the Ancestor says, “Creativity,” and you see the novel ways you’ve found solutions to problems, examples of your unique self-expression, and your creative nature.	The two of you walk the second circle, and the Ancestor says, “Creativity,” and you see the novel ways you’ve found solutions to problems, examples of your unique self-expression, and your creative nature.	Вы вдвоем проходите второй круг, и Предок говорит: «Творчество», и вы видите новые способы поиска решений проблем, примеры вашего уникального самовыражения и вашей творческой натуры.	The two of you walk the second circle, and the Ancestor says, “Creativity,” and you see the novel ways you’ve found solutions to problems, examples of your unique self-expression, and your creative nature.
The Ancestor gently nudges you to continue walking the third circle and says, “Calm”; first notice your body and your breathing. Then you see images of times in your life when you were calm or brought calm to someone else. See if there were times when you were calm in a stressful or challenging situation.	The Ancestor gently nudges you to continue walking the third circle and says, “Calm”; first notice your body and your breathing. Then you see images of times in your life when you were calm or brought calm to someone else. See if there were times when you were calm in a stressful or challenging situation.	Предок мягко подталкивает вас продолжать идти по третьему кругу и говорит: «Спокойно»; сначала обратите внимание на свое тело и свое дыхание. Затем вы видите образы моментов из своей жизни, когда вы были спокойны или успокаивали кого-то другого. Посмотрите, были ли моменты, когда вы были спокойны в стрессовой или сложной ситуации.	The Ancestor gently nudges you to continue walking the third circle and says, “Calm”; first notice your body and your breathing. Then you see images of times in your life when you were calm or brought calm to someone else. See if there were times when you were calm in a stressful or challenging situation.
When that is complete, the two of you move through the fourth inner circle, slowing your place a bit, and the Ancestor says, “Courage,” and shows you how you have been courageous in small and not-so-small ways. How you have stood up for yourself or others.	When that is complete, the two of you move through the fourth inner circle, slowing your place a bit, and the Ancestor says, “Courage,” and shows you how you have been courageous in small and not-so-small ways. How you have stood up for yourself or others.	Когда это будет завершено, вы двое двигаетесь через четвертый внутренний круг, немного замедляя свое место, и Предок говорит: «Мужество» и показывает вам, как вы проявляли смелость в маленьких и не очень маленьких проявлениях. Как вы постояли за себя или других.	When that is complete, the two of you move through the fourth inner circle, slowing your place a bit, and the Ancestor says, “Courage,” and shows you how you have been courageous in small and not-so-small ways. How you have stood up for yourself or others.
Next you walk the fifth inner circle of Curiosity. The Ancestor shows you times from your life when you engaged others with genuine interest in the triumphs and challenges of their lives. Notice how your curiosity encouraged others to open to share with you.	Next you walk the fifth inner circle of Curiosity. The Ancestor shows you times from your life when you engaged others with genuine interest in the triumphs and challenges of their lives. Notice how your curiosity encouraged others to open to share with you.	Далее вы проходите пятый внутренний круг Curiosity. «Предок» показывает вам моменты из вашей жизни, когда вы с искренним интересом привлекали других к победам и испытаниям их жизни. Обратите внимание, как ваше любопытство побудило других открыться и поделиться с вами.	Next you walk the fifth inner circle of Curiosity. The Ancestor shows you times from your life when you engaged others with genuine interest in the triumphs and challenges of their lives. Notice how your curiosity encouraged others to open to share with you.
Walking deeper into the labyrinth, the Ancestor says, “Confidence,” and commences to show you examples of this quality from childhood to now.	Walking deeper into the labyrinth, the Ancestor says, “Confidence,” and commences to show you examples of this quality from childhood to now.	Проходя глубже в лабиринт, Предок говорит: «Уверенность» и начинает показывать вам примеры этого качества из детства и по сей день.	Walking deeper into the labyrinth, the Ancestor says, “Confidence,” and commences to show you examples of this quality from childhood to now.
The circles have gotten much shorter to walk. The Ancestor says, “Clarity,” and you visualize the people and life situations when you knew exactly what to do or say without judgment.	The circles have gotten much shorter to walk. The Ancestor says, “Clarity,” and you visualize the people and life situations when you knew exactly what to do or say without judgment.	Круги стали намного короче. Предок говорит: «Ясность», и вы визуализируете людей и жизненные ситуации, когда вы точно знали, что делать или говорить, без осуждения.	The circles have gotten much shorter to walk. The Ancestor says, “Clarity,” and you visualize the people and life situations when you knew exactly what to do or say without judgment.
You and the Ancestor arrive at the centermost part of the labyrinth, where you find a bench.	You and the Ancestor arrive at the centermost part of the labyrinth, where you find a bench.	Вы и Предок доберетесь до центральной части лабиринта, где найдете скамейку.	You and the Ancestor arrive at the centermost part of the labyrinth, where you find a bench.
The Ancestor invites you to sit with them to watch how you have lived the final quality of Connectedness. You see connections from the past and the ones you have now. See if you can notice connections with other ancestors.	The Ancestor invites you to sit with them to watch how you have lived the final quality of Connectedness. You see connections from the past and the ones you have now. See if you can notice connections with other ancestors.	Предок приглашает вас сесть с ними и посмотреть, как вы прожили последнее качество Связности. Вы видите связи из прошлого и те, которые у вас есть сейчас. Посмотрите, сможете ли вы заметить связи с другими предками.	The Ancestor invites you to sit with them to watch how you have lived the final quality of Connectedness. You see connections from the past and the ones you have now. See if you can notice connections with other ancestors.
The Ancestor tells you it is time to travel back through the labyrinth and adds that you will discover tokens or gifts representing each quality of Self as you walk back to the beginning. The Ancestor goes on to say, “Each gift reflects how your qualities show up, and they are yours to take with you.” The Ancestor hands you a container to collect your gifts.	The Ancestor tells you it is time to travel back through the labyrinth and adds that you will discover tokens or gifts representing each quality of Self as you walk back to the beginning. The Ancestor goes on to say, “Each gift reflects how your qualities show up, and they are yours to take with you.” The Ancestor hands you a container to collect your gifts.	Предок сообщает вам, что пришло время вернуться через лабиринт, и добавляет, что по мере возвращения к началу вы обнаружите жетоны или дары, представляющие каждое качество «Я». Далее Предок говорит: «Каждый подарок отражает то, как проявляются ваши качества, и вы можете взять их с собой». Предок вручает вам контейнер для сбора ваших даров.	The Ancestor tells you it is time to travel back through the labyrinth and adds that you will discover tokens or gifts representing each quality of Self as you walk back to the beginning. The Ancestor goes on to say, “Each gift reflects how your qualities show up, and they are yours to take with you.” The Ancestor hands you a container to collect your gifts.
Accompanied by the Ancestor, you look around this inner space for your token of Connectedness. When you find it, you place it in the container.	Accompanied by the Ancestor, you look around this inner space for your token of Connectedness. When you find it, you place it in the container.	В сопровождении Предка вы осматриваете это внутреннее пространство в поисках своего знака Связности. Когда вы его найдете, вы поместите его в контейнер.	Accompanied by the Ancestor, you look around this inner space for your token of Connectedness. When you find it, you place it in the container.
Walking the next circle, you find the Clarity token. Before placing it in the container, acknowledge why you selected it.	Walking the next circle, you find the Clarity token. Before placing it in the container, acknowledge why you selected it.	Пройдя следующий круг, вы найдете жетон Ясности. Прежде чем поместить его в контейнер, поймите, почему вы выбрали его.	Walking the next circle, you find the Clarity token. Before placing it in the container, acknowledge why you selected it.
As you circle again, the gift representing Confidence is discovered, and you take it with you.	As you circle again, the gift representing Confidence is discovered, and you take it with you.	Когда вы снова кружите, вы обнаруживаете дар, символизирующий Уверенность, и берете его с собой.	As you circle again, the gift representing Confidence is discovered, and you take it with you.
Walking around, you come across your Curiosity keepsake. Take note of your selection before putting it away.	Walking around, you come across your Curiosity keepsake. Take note of your selection before putting it away.	Прогуливаясь, вы натыкаетесь на свой сувенир Curiosity. Обратите внимание на свой выбор, прежде чем убрать его.	Walking around, you come across your Curiosity keepsake. Take note of your selection before putting it away.
Entering the next turn, you see the memento for Courage. Hold it in your hand; admire what it looks like.	Entering the next turn, you see the memento for Courage. Hold it in your hand; admire what it looks like.	Войдя в следующий ход, вы увидите сувенир за отвагу. Держите его в руке; полюбуйтесь, как это выглядит.	Entering the next turn, you see the memento for Courage. Hold it in your hand; admire what it looks like.
The time to walk each circle increases as you locate and pick up the heirloom of Calm.	The time to walk each circle increases as you locate and pick up the heirloom of Calm.	Время прохождения каждого круга увеличивается по мере того, как вы находите и поднимаете реликвию Спокойствия.	The time to walk each circle increases as you locate and pick up the heirloom of Calm.
Next, you discover the Creativity gift.	Next, you discover the Creativity gift.	Далее вы открываете для себя дар творчества.	Next, you discover the Creativity gift.
Walking the outermost circle, you come upon the gift representing Compassion.	Walking the outermost circle, you come upon the gift representing Compassion.	Пройдя по внешнему кругу, вы находите дар, символизирующий Сострадание.	Walking the outermost circle, you come upon the gift representing Compassion.
When the two of you arrive back at the entrance of the labyrinth, you both take time to admire the collected gifts of Self and their importance in your journey forward.	When the two of you arrive back at the entrance of the labyrinth, you both take time to admire the collected gifts of Self and their importance in your journey forward.	Когда вы двое вернетесь ко входу в лабиринт, вы оба найдёте время, чтобы полюбоваться собранными дарами «Я» и их важностью для вашего путешествия вперёд.	When the two of you arrive back at the entrance of the labyrinth, you both take time to admire the collected gifts of Self and their importance in your journey forward.
The Ancestor says, “Everyone has these qualities, but each person’s expression of these gifts is unique. The most important thing about these gifts is you’ve always had them, and they are meant to be shared.”	The Ancestor says, “Everyone has these qualities, but each person’s expression of these gifts is unique. The most important thing about these gifts is you’ve always had them, and they are meant to be shared.”	Предок говорит: «У каждого есть эти качества, но выражение этих даров у каждого человека уникально. Самое главное в этих дарах то, что они всегда были у вас, и ими нужно делиться».	The Ancestor says, “Everyone has these qualities, but each person’s expression of these gifts is unique. The most important thing about these gifts is you’ve always had them, and they are meant to be shared.”
Take the time you need to end your time with the Ancestor, knowing you can meet with them whenever you please.	Take the time you need to end your time with the Ancestor, knowing you can meet with them whenever you please.	Найдите время, необходимое для того, чтобы покончить с Предком, зная, что вы можете встретиться с ним, когда захотите.	Take the time you need to end your time with the Ancestor, knowing you can meet with them whenever you please.
Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.	Сосредоточьте свое внимание на своем дыхании и просто дышите, возвращаясь в этот момент и пространство. Медленно откройте глаза, когда будете готовы.	Bring your awareness to your breath and just breathe as you re-enter this moment and space. Slowly open your eyes when you are ready.
Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Exercise 1: Journal Capture	Упражнение 1. Ведение журнала	Exercise 1: Journal Capture
Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.	Запишите то, что вы хотели бы уловить в результате этой медитации, например, откровение, размышление или что-то важное, что вы хотите запомнить из этого опыта.	Journal what you would like to capture from this meditation, like a revelation, reflection, or anything significant you want to remember from this experience.
Exercise 2: Labyrinth with the Ancestor Journal Questions	Exercise 2: Labyrinth with the Ancestor Journal Questions	Упражнение 2: Лабиринт с вопросами о журнале предков	Exercise 2: Labyrinth with the Ancestor Journal Questions
After you’ve done the Labyrinth with the Ancestor meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	After you’ve done the Labyrinth with the Ancestor meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.	После того, как вы прошли Лабиринт с медитацией Предка и написали быстрый «Захват журнала», потратьте некоторое время на более глубокое исследование, ответив на следующие подсказки журнала.	After you’ve done the Labyrinth with the Ancestor meditation and written your quick Journal Capture, take some time to explore more deeply by responding to the following journal prompts.
What gift did you receive for each of the qualities of Self, and what is the significance of that gift?	What gift did you receive for each of the qualities of Self, and what is the significance of that gift?	Какой дар вы получили за каждое из качеств своего «Я» и каково значение этого дара?	What gift did you receive for each of the qualities of Self, and what is the significance of that gift?
Connection	Connection	Связь	Connection
Clarity	Clarity	Ясность	Clarity
Confidence	Confidence	Уверенность	Confidence
Curiosity	Curiosity	Любопытство	Curiosity
Courage	Courage	Храбрость	Courage
Creativity	Creativity	Креативность	Creativity
Calm	Calm	Спокойствие	Calm
Compassion	Compassion	Сострадание	Compassion
Exercise 3: Create a U-Turn Statement	Exercise 3: Create a U-Turn Statement	Упражнение 3. Создайте заявление о развороте	Exercise 3: Create a U-Turn Statement
Use the eight qualities of Self to create a U-turn statement to remind you to go inside when you become activated by people, situations, and life circumstances. Below is my U-turn statement.	Use the eight qualities of Self to create a U-turn statement to remind you to go inside when you become activated by people, situations, and life circumstances. Below is my U-turn statement.	Используйте восемь качеств «Я», чтобы создать заявление о развороте, которое будет напоминать вам о необходимости идти внутрь себя, когда вас активируют люди, ситуации и жизненные обстоятельства. Ниже мое заявление о развороте.	Use the eight qualities of Self to create a U-turn statement to remind you to go inside when you become activated by people, situations, and life circumstances. Below is my U-turn statement.
I am Confident that there are Creative ways to Connect inside to witness my parts with Clarity, while remaining Calm and being Courageous enough to stay Curious when my parts get activated, remembering that a little Compassion goes a long way.	I am Confident that there are Creative ways to Connect inside to witness my parts with Clarity, while remaining Calm and being Courageous enough to stay Curious when my parts get activated, remembering that a little Compassion goes a long way.	Я Уверен, что существуют Творческие способы Соединиться внутри, чтобы с Ясностью наблюдать за своими частями, оставаясь при этом Спокойным и достаточно Смелым, чтобы оставаться Любопытным, когда мои части активируются, помня, что немного Сострадания имеет большое значение.	I am Confident that there are Creative ways to Connect inside to witness my parts with Clarity, while remaining Calm and being Courageous enough to stay Curious when my parts get activated, remembering that a little Compassion goes a long way.
CHAPTER 14	CHAPTER 14	ГЛАВА 14	CHAPTER 14
Still Listening	Still Listening	Все еще слушаю	Still Listening
What happens after unburdening and healing the wounds of the past? We become less reactive to people and situations that previously triggered and activated our parts. One of my core childhood wounds was connected to rejection. A part of me felt rejected when my grandmother and aunts would not validate my experience by telling me the truth about the return address on the letter from my father. My feelings of rejection were further validated when I returned home from Louisiana to the truth of my parents’ impending divorce. At nine years old I had a close bond with my father, and a part of me believed divorce meant a rejection of me and a loss of my connection with him. The feelings of rejection gained a stronger hold as life unfolded with my father’s remarriage to a woman who had a child who got to live with him full-time, followed by the birth of their child, my younger brother. The part of me that felt rejected was exiled for over 40 years, and the reactivity of my raging protectors kept my father and me in a relationship that moved on a continuum from strained to estrangement for 11 years in my early adulthood.	What happens after unburdening and healing the wounds of the past? We become less reactive to people and situations that previously triggered and activated our parts. One of my core childhood wounds was connected to rejection. A part of me felt rejected when my grandmother and aunts would not validate my experience by telling me the truth about the return address on the letter from my father. My feelings of rejection were further validated when I returned home from Louisiana to the truth of my parents’ impending divorce. At nine years old I had a close bond with my father, and a part of me believed divorce meant a rejection of me and a loss of my connection with him. The feelings of rejection gained a stronger hold as life unfolded with my father’s remarriage to a woman who had a child who got to live with him full-time, followed by the birth of their child, my younger brother. The part of me that felt rejected was exiled for over 40 years, and the reactivity of my raging protectors kept my father and me in a relationship that moved on a continuum from strained to estrangement for 11 years in my early adulthood.	Что происходит после освобождения и исцеления ран прошлого? Мы становимся менее реагирующими на людей и ситуации, которые раньше запускали и активировали наши части. Одна из моих основных детских ран была связана с отвержением. Часть меня чувствовала себя отвергнутой, когда моя бабушка и тети не подтвердили мой опыт, сказав мне правду об обратном адресе в письме от моего отца. Мое чувство отвержения еще больше подтвердилось, когда я вернулся домой из Луизианы и узнал правду о предстоящем разводе моих родителей. В девять лет у меня была тесная связь с отцом, и часть меня считала, что развод означает отказ от меня и потерю связи с ним. Чувство отвержения усилилось по мере того, как жизнь разворачивалась после повторного брака моего отца с женщиной, у которой был ребенок, который должен был жить с ним постоянно, после чего у них родился ребенок, мой младший брат. Та часть меня, которая чувствовала себя отвергнутой, была изгнана более чем на 40 лет, а реакция моих яростных защитников удерживала нас с отцом в отношениях, которые в течение 11 лет моего раннего взросления развивались от натянутости к отчуждению.	What happens after unburdening and healing the wounds of the past? We become less reactive to people and situations that previously triggered and activated our parts. One of my core childhood wounds was connected to rejection. A part of me felt rejected when my grandmother and aunts would not validate my experience by telling me the truth about the return address on the letter from my father. My feelings of rejection were further validated when I returned home from Louisiana to the truth of my parents’ impending divorce. At nine years old I had a close bond with my father, and a part of me believed divorce meant a rejection of me and a loss of my connection with him. The feelings of rejection gained a stronger hold as life unfolded with my father’s remarriage to a woman who had a child who got to live with him full-time, followed by the birth of their child, my younger brother. The part of me that felt rejected was exiled for over 40 years, and the reactivity of my raging protectors kept my father and me in a relationship that moved on a continuum from strained to estrangement for 11 years in my early adulthood.
For over 20 years I sought help through therapy, personal development workshops, retreats, and self-help books to heal this core wound of rejection. When I took the IFS Level 1 training, I had the opportunity to work with the parts of myself that felt both rage and rejection, and from that one demonstration session I knew IFS offered a level of healing that I had not experienced personally or seen professionally in my work with clients. I continued my IFS healing journey, and after unburdening each of my parts, protectors, and exiles who held the rage and feelings of rejection, I was able to engage with my father with no reactivity or triggering. Additionally, these parts were no longer triggered by other people and situations that reminded them of, or were similar to, my relationship with my father. In nine sessions, I received the elusive healing I had sought for decades.	For over 20 years I sought help through therapy, personal development workshops, retreats, and self-help books to heal this core wound of rejection. When I took the IFS Level 1 training, I had the opportunity to work with the parts of myself that felt both rage and rejection, and from that one demonstration session I knew IFS offered a level of healing that I had not experienced personally or seen professionally in my work with clients. I continued my IFS healing journey, and after unburdening each of my parts, protectors, and exiles who held the rage and feelings of rejection, I was able to engage with my father with no reactivity or triggering. Additionally, these parts were no longer triggered by other people and situations that reminded them of, or were similar to, my relationship with my father. In nine sessions, I received the elusive healing I had sought for decades.	Более 20 лет я искал помощи в терапии, семинарах по личностному развитию, ретритах и ​​книгах самопомощи, чтобы залечить эту глубокую рану отвержения. Когда я прошел тренинг IFS Уровня 1, у меня была возможность поработать с теми частями себя, которые чувствовали как ярость, так и отвержение, и из этого одного демонстрационного сеанса я понял, что IFS предлагает уровень исцеления, которого я не испытывал лично или не видел профессионально. в моей работе с клиентами. Я продолжил свой путь исцеления IFS, и после освобождения каждой из моих частей, защитников и изгнанников, которые сдерживали ярость и чувство отвержения, я смог взаимодействовать со своим отцом без какой-либо реакции или триггера. Кроме того, эти части больше не вызывались другими людьми и ситуациями, которые напоминали им или были похожи на мои отношения с отцом. За девять сеансов я получил неуловимое исцеление, которого искал десятилетиями.	For over 20 years I sought help through therapy, personal development workshops, retreats, and self-help books to heal this core wound of rejection. When I took the IFS Level 1 training, I had the opportunity to work with the parts of myself that felt both rage and rejection, and from that one demonstration session I knew IFS offered a level of healing that I had not experienced personally or seen professionally in my work with clients. I continued my IFS healing journey, and after unburdening each of my parts, protectors, and exiles who held the rage and feelings of rejection, I was able to engage with my father with no reactivity or triggering. Additionally, these parts were no longer triggered by other people and situations that reminded them of, or were similar to, my relationship with my father. In nine sessions, I received the elusive healing I had sought for decades.
However, my healing journey did not end with the parts that felt rage and rejection. I continued to discover other parts that held extreme beliefs. It seemed the more I worked with my system, the more willing parts were to come to the fore to receive the healing they witnessed other parts receiving.	However, my healing journey did not end with the parts that felt rage and rejection. I continued to discover other parts that held extreme beliefs. It seemed the more I worked with my system, the more willing parts were to come to the fore to receive the healing they witnessed other parts receiving.	Однако мой путь исцеления не закончился на тех частях тела, которые ощущали гнев и отвержение. Я продолжал обнаруживать другие части тела, которые придерживались крайних убеждений. Казалось, что чем больше я работал со своей системой, тем больше желающих частей выходило на передний план, чтобы получить исцеление, свидетелями которого были другие части.	However, my healing journey did not end with the parts that felt rage and rejection. I continued to discover other parts that held extreme beliefs. It seemed the more I worked with my system, the more willing parts were to come to the fore to receive the healing they witnessed other parts receiving.
This was most evident as I rose in leadership within the IFS Institute. I am the first Black person and person of color to enter the trainer track and be promoted to solo lead trainer. Being the first Black woman in a leadership role in an all-white organization activated distrusting, fearful, striving, and sad parts. Parts distrusted that the Institute would be true to their new stated mission of creating more inclusion and equity. Fearful parts were afraid I would be a tokenized checkbox for diversity. When the Institute put their mission into action by actively recruiting and training future leaders from the Global Majority and LGBTQIA+ communities, I had striving parts who wanted to be a good role model to those coming into the organization after me. Lastly, I had sad parts who were painfully familiar with blazing a trail alone with no road map as the first or only Black woman in a role.	This was most evident as I rose in leadership within the IFS Institute. I am the first Black person and person of color to enter the trainer track and be promoted to solo lead trainer. Being the first Black woman in a leadership role in an all-white organization activated distrusting, fearful, striving, and sad parts. Parts distrusted that the Institute would be true to their new stated mission of creating more inclusion and equity. Fearful parts were afraid I would be a tokenized checkbox for diversity. When the Institute put their mission into action by actively recruiting and training future leaders from the Global Majority and LGBTQIA+ communities, I had striving parts who wanted to be a good role model to those coming into the organization after me. Lastly, I had sad parts who were painfully familiar with blazing a trail alone with no road map as the first or only Black woman in a role.	Это стало наиболее очевидным, когда я поднялся на руководящую должность в Институте IFS. Я первый чернокожий и цветной человек, который вошел в тренерскую программу и получил повышение до сольного ведущего тренера. То, что она стала первой чернокожей женщиной на руководящей роли в организации, состоящей исключительно из белых, активизировало недоверчивые, боязливые, стремящиеся и грустные части. Партс не верил, что Институт будет верен своей новой заявленной миссии по обеспечению большей инклюзивности и равенства. Напуганные части боялись, что я стану символическим флажком разнообразия. Когда Институт реализовал свою миссию, активно набирая и обучая будущих лидеров из сообществ глобального большинства и ЛГБТКИА+, во мне были стремящиеся части, которые хотели быть хорошим примером для подражания для тех, кто придет в организацию после меня. Наконец, у меня были печальные роли, которым до боли знакомо прокладывать путь в одиночку, без дорожной карты, в качестве первой или единственной чернокожей женщины в роли.	This was most evident as I rose in leadership within the IFS Institute. I am the first Black person and person of color to enter the trainer track and be promoted to solo lead trainer. Being the first Black woman in a leadership role in an all-white organization activated distrusting, fearful, striving, and sad parts. Parts distrusted that the Institute would be true to their new stated mission of creating more inclusion and equity. Fearful parts were afraid I would be a tokenized checkbox for diversity. When the Institute put their mission into action by actively recruiting and training future leaders from the Global Majority and LGBTQIA+ communities, I had striving parts who wanted to be a good role model to those coming into the organization after me. Lastly, I had sad parts who were painfully familiar with blazing a trail alone with no road map as the first or only Black woman in a role.
I was committed to using the model to help me become a better leader and trainer. So each time a situation activated the parts I’ve just mentioned and I reached a point where I could not resolve the reactivity on my own, I went back to my highly skilled IFS therapist. This happened several times during the five years when I was taking on successive and expansive roles in leadership. Self wanted to bring healing to every part of me that was open to it. With each part that was healed, reactivity in my system decreased, while the expression of Self-energy increased. The increased access to Self-energy encouraged other parts of me to trust Self and the healing process. By the time I was in the training I described in the beginning of Chapter 4, I had immediate and reliable access to Self because of the relationship, trust, and connection with my parts.	I was committed to using the model to help me become a better leader and trainer. So each time a situation activated the parts I’ve just mentioned and I reached a point where I could not resolve the reactivity on my own, I went back to my highly skilled IFS therapist. This happened several times during the five years when I was taking on successive and expansive roles in leadership. Self wanted to bring healing to every part of me that was open to it. With each part that was healed, reactivity in my system decreased, while the expression of Self-energy increased. The increased access to Self-energy encouraged other parts of me to trust Self and the healing process. By the time I was in the training I described in the beginning of Chapter 4, I had immediate and reliable access to Self because of the relationship, trust, and connection with my parts.	Я был полон решимости использовать эту модель, чтобы помочь мне стать лучшим лидером и тренером. Поэтому каждый раз, когда ситуация активировала части, которые я только что упомянул, и я достигал точки, когда я не мог самостоятельно справиться с реактивностью, я возвращался к своему высококвалифицированному терапевту IFS. Это случалось несколько раз за те пять лет, когда я последовательно и широко исполнял руководящие роли. «Я» хотел исцелить каждую часть меня, которая была открыта для этого. С каждой исцелённой частью реактивность моей системы уменьшалась, в то время как выражение собственной энергии возрастало. Расширение доступа к энергии «Я» побудило другие части меня доверять «Я» и процессу исцеления. К тому времени, когда я проходил обучение, описанное в начале главы 4, у меня был немедленный и надежный доступ к Я благодаря отношениям, доверию и связи с моими частями.	I was committed to using the model to help me become a better leader and trainer. So each time a situation activated the parts I’ve just mentioned and I reached a point where I could not resolve the reactivity on my own, I went back to my highly skilled IFS therapist. This happened several times during the five years when I was taking on successive and expansive roles in leadership. Self wanted to bring healing to every part of me that was open to it. With each part that was healed, reactivity in my system decreased, while the expression of Self-energy increased. The increased access to Self-energy encouraged other parts of me to trust Self and the healing process. By the time I was in the training I described in the beginning of Chapter 4, I had immediate and reliable access to Self because of the relationship, trust, and connection with my parts.
PARTS STILL GET ACTIVATED	PARTS STILL GET ACTIVATED	ЧАСТИ ЕЩЕ АКТИВИРУЮТСЯ	PARTS STILL GET ACTIVATED
Working with and getting to know our internal system is an ongoing process. As we befriend, witness, and unburden parts, the system shifts. The increased trust and shifting opens us to deeper healing, uncovering new parts that want and need attention or parts we previously unburdened that need deeper healing. Either way, we still will get triggered or activated. Why does this happen? Well, we are not capable of being always Self-led. It would be akin to being in bliss or Nirvana constantly. But I have found that activation shows me where I have work to do. It points to the parts of me that need connection and healing. Admittedly, some of the work, especially with core wounds, deep trauma, and persistently distrustful parts can be difficult to do alone. Refer to the Resource section at the end of the book to locate additional resources and support.	Working with and getting to know our internal system is an ongoing process. As we befriend, witness, and unburden parts, the system shifts. The increased trust and shifting opens us to deeper healing, uncovering new parts that want and need attention or parts we previously unburdened that need deeper healing. Either way, we still will get triggered or activated. Why does this happen? Well, we are not capable of being always Self-led. It would be akin to being in bliss or Nirvana constantly. But I have found that activation shows me where I have work to do. It points to the parts of me that need connection and healing. Admittedly, some of the work, especially with core wounds, deep trauma, and persistently distrustful parts can be difficult to do alone. Refer to the Resource section at the end of the book to locate additional resources and support.	Работа с нашей внутренней системой и ее изучение — это непрерывный процесс. По мере того, как мы дружим, свидетельствуем и освобождаем части от бремени, система меняется. Возросшее доверие и перемены открывают нам путь к более глубокому исцелению, открывая новые части, которые хотят и нуждаются во внимании, или части, которые мы ранее обременили и которые нуждаются в более глубоком исцелении. В любом случае, мы все равно будем срабатывать или активироваться. Почему это происходит? Что ж, мы не способны всегда быть самостоятельными. Это было бы похоже на постоянное пребывание в блаженстве или нирване. Но я обнаружил, что активация показывает мне, где мне есть над чем работать. Это указывает на те части меня, которые нуждаются в соединении и исцелении. Следует признать, что некоторые работы, особенно с глубокими ранениями, глубокими травмами и постоянно вызывающими недоверие частями тела, может быть трудно выполнить в одиночку. Обратитесь к разделу «Ресурсы» в конце книги, чтобы найти дополнительные ресурсы и поддержку.	Working with and getting to know our internal system is an ongoing process. As we befriend, witness, and unburden parts, the system shifts. The increased trust and shifting opens us to deeper healing, uncovering new parts that want and need attention or parts we previously unburdened that need deeper healing. Either way, we still will get triggered or activated. Why does this happen? Well, we are not capable of being always Self-led. It would be akin to being in bliss or Nirvana constantly. But I have found that activation shows me where I have work to do. It points to the parts of me that need connection and healing. Admittedly, some of the work, especially with core wounds, deep trauma, and persistently distrustful parts can be difficult to do alone. Refer to the Resource section at the end of the book to locate additional resources and support.
GOALS OF PARTS WORK	GOALS OF PARTS WORK	ЦЕЛИ РАБОТЫ ЧАСТЕЙ	GOALS OF PARTS WORK
I shared the goals of IFS therapy in Chapter 1, and I’ll repeat them here. The goals of IFS therapy are to liberate parts from their extreme roles, restore Self-leadership, create balance and harmony within the system, and bring Self-energy to the external world.1 Let’s look at how reaching each of these goals results in a Self-led life.	I shared the goals of IFS therapy in Chapter 1, and I’ll repeat them here. The goals of IFS therapy are to liberate parts from their extreme roles, restore Self-leadership, create balance and harmony within the system, and bring Self-energy to the external world.1 Let’s look at how reaching each of these goals results in a Self-led life.	Я рассказал о целях терапии IFS в главе 1 и повторю их здесь. Цели терапии IFS — освободить части от их экстремальных ролей, восстановить Самолидерство, создать баланс и гармонию внутри системы и принести энергию Самости во внешний мир.1 Давайте посмотрим, как достижение каждой из этих целей приводит к Самостоятельная жизнь.	I shared the goals of IFS therapy in Chapter 1, and I’ll repeat them here. The goals of IFS therapy are to liberate parts from their extreme roles, restore Self-leadership, create balance and harmony within the system, and bring Self-energy to the external world.1 Let’s look at how reaching each of these goals results in a Self-led life.
Although I came to IFS first as a therapist and learner, then later as a therapy client, IFS is a guiding principle for my life. Now that my parts have an awareness and relationship with me and know they are not alone, they trust me to lead. However, their trust was earned. It was through listening to and validating their experiences that their confidence in Self increased. As parts released their burdens and embraced their gifts, the entire system has access to these natural gifts. I have fewer polarizations inside, which increases balance and a willingness for parts to work together, which in turn increases harmony. My parts welcome their roles as advisors and supporters who no longer have the burden of acting, feeling, and holding beliefs contrary to their innate nature. My parts readily unblend and allow for the U-turn when they get activated. As I’ve mentioned, I believe the U-turn is one of the most beneficial tools in IFS. The process of unblending with the knowledge that I am available and willing to be with their experiences has been life changing and life giving in my system. It gives my parts space to pause and let me (Self) address the cause of their activation. I have learned that more than anything, my parts want acknowledgment and validation. They often need calming, as I have some excitable parts. My experience has been that no matter what my parts require, Self can and will provide it. IFS has transformed the ways I interact and engage with people, situations, and conflict both internally and in the world. I am present in ways I couldn’t be before coming into a relationship with and healing parts of myself who had either no awareness or trust of Self.	Although I came to IFS first as a therapist and learner, then later as a therapy client, IFS is a guiding principle for my life. Now that my parts have an awareness and relationship with me and know they are not alone, they trust me to lead. However, their trust was earned. It was through listening to and validating their experiences that their confidence in Self increased. As parts released their burdens and embraced their gifts, the entire system has access to these natural gifts. I have fewer polarizations inside, which increases balance and a willingness for parts to work together, which in turn increases harmony. My parts welcome their roles as advisors and supporters who no longer have the burden of acting, feeling, and holding beliefs contrary to their innate nature. My parts readily unblend and allow for the U-turn when they get activated. As I’ve mentioned, I believe the U-turn is one of the most beneficial tools in IFS. The process of unblending with the knowledge that I am available and willing to be with their experiences has been life changing and life giving in my system. It gives my parts space to pause and let me (Self) address the cause of their activation. I have learned that more than anything, my parts want acknowledgment and validation. They often need calming, as I have some excitable parts. My experience has been that no matter what my parts require, Self can and will provide it. IFS has transformed the ways I interact and engage with people, situations, and conflict both internally and in the world. I am present in ways I couldn’t be before coming into a relationship with and healing parts of myself who had either no awareness or trust of Self.	Хотя я пришел в IFS сначала как терапевт и ученик, а затем как клиент терапии, IFS является руководящим принципом в моей жизни. Теперь, когда мои части осознали и установили отношения со мной и знают, что они не одиноки, они доверяют мне лидерство. Однако их доверие было заслужено. Именно благодаря выслушиванию и подтверждению их опыта их уверенность в себе возросла. Когда части освободились от своего бремени и приняли свои дары, вся система получила доступ к этим естественным дарам. У меня внутри меньше поляризаций, что увеличивает баланс и готовность частей работать вместе, что, в свою очередь, увеличивает гармонию. Мои части приветствуют их роль советников и сторонников, которые больше не несут бремя действий, чувств и убеждений, противоречащих их врожденной природе. Мои части легко разъединяются и допускают разворот, когда их активируют. Как я уже упоминал, я считаю, что разворот — один из самых полезных инструментов в IFS. Процесс расставания со знанием того, что я доступен и готов быть с их опытом, изменил жизнь и дал жизнь моей системе. Это дает моим частям возможность сделать паузу и позволить мне (Самому) устранить причину их активации. Я понял, что больше всего мои части нуждаются в признании и подтверждении. Их часто нужно успокоить, так как у меня есть некоторые возбудимые части. Мой опыт показывает, что независимо от того, чего требуют мои части, «Я» может и предоставит это. IFS изменила способы моего взаимодействия и взаимодействия с людьми, ситуациями и конфликтами как внутри страны, так и в мире. Я присутствую так, как не мог быть до того, как вступил в отношения и исцелил те части себя, которые не имели ни осознания, ни доверия к Себе.	Although I came to IFS first as a therapist and learner, then later as a therapy client, IFS is a guiding principle for my life. Now that my parts have an awareness and relationship with me and know they are not alone, they trust me to lead. However, their trust was earned. It was through listening to and validating their experiences that their confidence in Self increased. As parts released their burdens and embraced their gifts, the entire system has access to these natural gifts. I have fewer polarizations inside, which increases balance and a willingness for parts to work together, which in turn increases harmony. My parts welcome their roles as advisors and supporters who no longer have the burden of acting, feeling, and holding beliefs contrary to their innate nature. My parts readily unblend and allow for the U-turn when they get activated. As I’ve mentioned, I believe the U-turn is one of the most beneficial tools in IFS. The process of unblending with the knowledge that I am available and willing to be with their experiences has been life changing and life giving in my system. It gives my parts space to pause and let me (Self) address the cause of their activation. I have learned that more than anything, my parts want acknowledgment and validation. They often need calming, as I have some excitable parts. My experience has been that no matter what my parts require, Self can and will provide it. IFS has transformed the ways I interact and engage with people, situations, and conflict both internally and in the world. I am present in ways I couldn’t be before coming into a relationship with and healing parts of myself who had either no awareness or trust of Self.
BENEFITS OF PARTS WORK	BENEFITS OF PARTS WORK	ПРЕИМУЩЕСТВА РАБОТЫ С ЗАПЧАСТЯМИ	BENEFITS OF PARTS WORK
As you have met, befriended, and even healed some of your parts, I hope you have already experienced the benefits of parts work. In working with our parts, we are not adding or gaining anything new; we are uncovering and increasing access to what we already possess. Below are nine benefits of parts work I have experienced and/or my clients have shared. I hope that you will also experience these benefits of your work.	As you have met, befriended, and even healed some of your parts, I hope you have already experienced the benefits of parts work. In working with our parts, we are not adding or gaining anything new; we are uncovering and increasing access to what we already possess. Below are nine benefits of parts work I have experienced and/or my clients have shared. I hope that you will also experience these benefits of your work.	Поскольку вы познакомились, подружились и даже исцелили некоторые свои части, я надеюсь, что вы уже ощутили преимущества работы с частями. Работая с нашими частями, мы не добавляем и не приобретаем ничего нового; мы открываем и расширяем доступ к тому, чем уже обладаем. Ниже приведены девять преимуществ работы с запчастями, с которыми я столкнулся и/или о которых рассказали мои клиенты. Я надеюсь, что вы также ощутите эти преимущества своей работы.	As you have met, befriended, and even healed some of your parts, I hope you have already experienced the benefits of parts work. In working with our parts, we are not adding or gaining anything new; we are uncovering and increasing access to what we already possess. Below are nine benefits of parts work I have experienced and/or my clients have shared. I hope that you will also experience these benefits of your work.
Less parts reactivity: Parts become calmer when they have a relationship with Self and experience unburdening.	Less parts reactivity: Parts become calmer when they have a relationship with Self and experience unburdening.	Меньше реактивности частей: части становятся спокойнее, когда они вступают в отношения с «Я» и испытывают освобождение от бремени.	Less parts reactivity: Parts become calmer when they have a relationship with Self and experience unburdening.
Greater choice: In their extreme states, parts have little to no awareness of other options beyond what they are currently doing. After unburdening, they have greater access to choose because they are free of their extreme roles and have access to their natural gifts.	Greater choice: In their extreme states, parts have little to no awareness of other options beyond what they are currently doing. After unburdening, they have greater access to choose because they are free of their extreme roles and have access to their natural gifts.	Больший выбор: в своих крайних состояниях части практически не осознают других вариантов, кроме того, что они делают в данный момент. После освобождения от бремени у них появляется больше возможностей выбора, поскольку они свободны от своих крайних ролей и имеют доступ к своим природным дарам.	Greater choice: In their extreme states, parts have little to no awareness of other options beyond what they are currently doing. After unburdening, they have greater access to choose because they are free of their extreme roles and have access to their natural gifts.
Parts as advisors: The system has access to the wisdom of its parts. They can have an active role, if they choose, in moving the system forward emotionally, physically, professionally, interpersonally, and in many other ways.	Parts as advisors: The system has access to the wisdom of its parts. They can have an active role, if they choose, in moving the system forward emotionally, physically, professionally, interpersonally, and in many other ways.	Части как советники. Система имеет доступ к мудрости своих частей. Они могут играть активную роль, если захотят, в продвижении системы вперед эмоционально, физически, профессионально, межличностно и многими другими способами.	Parts as advisors: The system has access to the wisdom of its parts. They can have an active role, if they choose, in moving the system forward emotionally, physically, professionally, interpersonally, and in many other ways.
Improved relationships: With less reactivity, increased choice, and parts in new validating roles, relationships with other people improve. Parts can bring their positive qualities to relationships.	Improved relationships: With less reactivity, increased choice, and parts in new validating roles, relationships with other people improve. Parts can bring their positive qualities to relationships.	Улучшение отношений: благодаря уменьшению реактивности, расширению выбора и участию в новых проверяющих ролях отношения с другими людьми улучшаются. Части могут привнести в отношения свои положительные качества.	Improved relationships: With less reactivity, increased choice, and parts in new validating roles, relationships with other people improve. Parts can bring their positive qualities to relationships.
Trust in Self: Parts trust Self to lead the system and to assist them when they get activated because they have a firsthand experience of Self and the qualities that can help them transform.	Trust in Self: Parts trust Self to lead the system and to assist them when they get activated because they have a firsthand experience of Self and the qualities that can help them transform.	Доверие к Себе: Части доверяют Себе вести систему и помогать ей, когда она активируется, потому что у них есть непосредственный опыт Самости и качеств, которые могут помочь им трансформироваться.	Trust in Self: Parts trust Self to lead the system and to assist them when they get activated because they have a firsthand experience of Self and the qualities that can help them transform.
Depersonalize behavior of others: We accept that everyone has parts, which means the poor behavior or mistreatment by others is not personal. We can see their parts in action.	Depersonalize behavior of others: We accept that everyone has parts, which means the poor behavior or mistreatment by others is not personal. We can see their parts in action.	Деперсонализируйте поведение других: мы признаем, что у каждого есть части, а это означает, что плохое поведение или плохое обращение со стороны других не являются личными. Мы можем увидеть их части в действии.	Depersonalize behavior of others: We accept that everyone has parts, which means the poor behavior or mistreatment by others is not personal. We can see their parts in action.
Increased access to Self: The healing process naturally increases access to Self. As parts release burdens and extreme roles, they have more access to Self.	Increased access to Self: The healing process naturally increases access to Self. As parts release burdens and extreme roles, they have more access to Self.	Расширение доступа к себе. Процесс исцеления естественным образом увеличивает доступ к себе. По мере того, как части освобождаются от бремени и экстремальных ролей, они получают больше доступа к «Я».	Increased access to Self: The healing process naturally increases access to Self. As parts release burdens and extreme roles, they have more access to Self.
Grounded and present: With the release of extreme roles, the system is experienced as grounded and present.	Grounded and present: With the release of extreme roles, the system is experienced as grounded and present.	Заземленная и присутствующая: с освобождением крайних ролей система воспринимается как заземленная и присутствующая.	Grounded and present: With the release of extreme roles, the system is experienced as grounded and present.
Embodiment: The experience of feeling more “like yourself” or “present in your body” or “comfortable in your body.” Also, a physical experience of the positive qualities parts express with the release of their burdens.	Embodiment: The experience of feeling more “like yourself” or “present in your body” or “comfortable in your body.” Also, a physical experience of the positive qualities parts express with the release of their burdens.	Воплощение: ощущение себя более «самым собой», «присутствующим в своем теле» или «комфортным в своем теле». Кроме того, физический опыт частей положительных качеств выражается в освобождении от их бремени.	Embodiment: The experience of feeling more “like yourself” or “present in your body” or “comfortable in your body.” Also, a physical experience of the positive qualities parts express with the release of their burdens.
YOUR LISTENING JOURNEY	YOUR LISTENING JOURNEY	ВАШ ПУТЕШЕСТВИЕ ПРОСЛУШИВАНИЯ	YOUR LISTENING JOURNEY
I have found that working with my parts and being in relationship with my ancestors is an ongoing process. I am committed to a long-term relationship with both. I continue to nurture these relationships, encouraging them to grow and deepen. Over time, the relationship with my parts has become more trusting, meaningful, and valuable. I have grown to lean in to the wisdom and guidance of my ancestors, especially when life doesn’t seem to make sense. I appreciate their loving care for me and what is important to me, as shown in how they lovingly led me through many of the meditations shared here.	I have found that working with my parts and being in relationship with my ancestors is an ongoing process. I am committed to a long-term relationship with both. I continue to nurture these relationships, encouraging them to grow and deepen. Over time, the relationship with my parts has become more trusting, meaningful, and valuable. I have grown to lean in to the wisdom and guidance of my ancestors, especially when life doesn’t seem to make sense. I appreciate their loving care for me and what is important to me, as shown in how they lovingly led me through many of the meditations shared here.	Я обнаружил, что работа со своими частями тела и отношения с моими предками — это непрерывный процесс. Я настроен на долгосрочные отношения с обоими. Я продолжаю развивать эти отношения, поощряя их расти и углубляться. Со временем отношения с моими частями стали более доверительными, значимыми и ценными. Я научился полагаться на мудрость и руководство своих предков, особенно когда жизнь кажется не имеющей смысла. Я ценю их любящую заботу обо мне и о том, что для меня важно, о чем свидетельствует то, как они с любовью провели меня через многие из представленных здесь медитаций.	I have found that working with my parts and being in relationship with my ancestors is an ongoing process. I am committed to a long-term relationship with both. I continue to nurture these relationships, encouraging them to grow and deepen. Over time, the relationship with my parts has become more trusting, meaningful, and valuable. I have grown to lean in to the wisdom and guidance of my ancestors, especially when life doesn’t seem to make sense. I appreciate their loving care for me and what is important to me, as shown in how they lovingly led me through many of the meditations shared here.
This book has been created as a joint project between me and the Writing Clan of my mother’s mother’s ancestral line. It has changed how I experience myself, the world, and how I interact with others. I have learned through this process that my ancestors are always present and available to me as I am for my parts. We, me, my parts, and my ancestors move through life connected and interrelated, no longer isolated and alone. I wish the same for you.	This book has been created as a joint project between me and the Writing Clan of my mother’s mother’s ancestral line. It has changed how I experience myself, the world, and how I interact with others. I have learned through this process that my ancestors are always present and available to me as I am for my parts. We, me, my parts, and my ancestors move through life connected and interrelated, no longer isolated and alone. I wish the same for you.	Эта книга создана как совместный проект меня и Писающего клана по материнской линии моей матери. Это изменило то, как я ощущаю себя, мир и то, как я взаимодействую с другими. Благодаря этому процессу я узнал, что мои предки всегда присутствуют и доступны мне, как и я со своей стороны. Мы, я, мои части и мои предки движемся по жизни связанными и взаимосвязанными, больше не изолированными и одинокими. Я желаю тебе того же.	This book has been created as a joint project between me and the Writing Clan of my mother’s mother’s ancestral line. It has changed how I experience myself, the world, and how I interact with others. I have learned through this process that my ancestors are always present and available to me as I am for my parts. We, me, my parts, and my ancestors move through life connected and interrelated, no longer isolated and alone. I wish the same for you.
I encourage you to continue your healing journey by expanding and deepening your relationship with your parts and ancestors. Two key resources to assist you are locating an IFS therapist/practitioner and an Ancestral Lineage Healing practitioner. In addition to these resources, you’ll find other unique and useful resources in the pages ahead.	I encourage you to continue your healing journey by expanding and deepening your relationship with your parts and ancestors. Two key resources to assist you are locating an IFS therapist/practitioner and an Ancestral Lineage Healing practitioner. In addition to these resources, you’ll find other unique and useful resources in the pages ahead.	Я призываю вас продолжить путь исцеления, расширяя и углубляя отношения со своими частями тела и предками. Два ключевых ресурса, которые помогут вам, — это найти терапевта/практика IFS и практикующего целителя по линии предков. Помимо этих ресурсов, на последующих страницах вы найдете другие уникальные и полезные ресурсы.	I encourage you to continue your healing journey by expanding and deepening your relationship with your parts and ancestors. Two key resources to assist you are locating an IFS therapist/practitioner and an Ancestral Lineage Healing practitioner. In addition to these resources, you’ll find other unique and useful resources in the pages ahead.
Still Listening Resources	Still Listening Resources	Ресурсы, которые все еще слушают	Still Listening Resources
Author’s Website	Author’s Website	Сайт автора	Author’s Website
https://tamalafloyd.com/	https://tamalafloyd.com/	https://tamalafloyd.com/	https://tamalafloyd.com/
IFS Therapy	IFS Therapy	IFS-терапия	IFS Therapy
Locate an IFS Therapist/Practitioner	Locate an IFS Therapist/Practitioner	Найдите терапевта/практика IFS	Locate an IFS Therapist/Practitioner
https://ifs-institute.com/practitioners	https://ifs-institute.com/practitioners	https://ifs-institute.com/practitioners	https://ifs-institute.com/practitioners
Locate an IFS Therapist of Color	Locate an IFS Therapist of Color	Найдите цветного терапевта IFS	Locate an IFS Therapist of Color
www.ifspoc.com	www.ifspoc.com	www.ifspoc.com	www.ifspoc.com
Locate a Multilingual IFS Therapist (languages available:	Locate a Multilingual IFS Therapist (languages available:	Найдите многоязычного терапевта IFS (доступные языки:	Locate a Multilingual IFS Therapist (languages available:
Spanish, Portuguese, Mandarin, and Taiwanese)	Spanish, Portuguese, Mandarin, and Taiwanese)	испанский, португальский, китайский и тайваньский)	Spanish, Portuguese, Mandarin, and Taiwanese)
https://ifstherapyonline.com/	https://ifstherapyonline.com/	https://ifstherapyonline.com/	https://ifstherapyonline.com/
Ancestral Lineage Healing	Ancestral Lineage Healing	Исцеление родословной предков	Ancestral Lineage Healing
Locate an Ancestral Lineage Healing Practitioner	Locate an Ancestral Lineage Healing Practitioner	Найдите практикующего целителя по линии предков.	Locate an Ancestral Lineage Healing Practitioner
https://ancestralmedicine.org/practitioner-directory/	https://ancestralmedicine.org/practitioner-directory/	https://ancestralmedicine.org/practitioner-directory/	https://ancestralmedicine.org/practitioner-directory/
Jamari White, Ancestral Medicine Practitioner	Jamari White, Ancestral Medicine Practitioner	Джамари Уайт, практикующий врач древней медицины	Jamari White, Ancestral Medicine Practitioner
www.kwawjamari.com	www.kwawjamari.com	www.kwawjamari.com	www.kwawjamari.com
Ancestral Lineage Healing Courses	Ancestral Lineage Healing Courses	Курсы исцеления по линии предков	Ancestral Lineage Healing Courses
https://ancestralmedicine.org/online-course/ancestors/	https://ancestralmedicine.org/online-course/ancestors/	https://ancestralmedicine.org/online-course/ancestors/	https://ancestralmedicine.org/online-course/ancestors/
IFS Training Programs	IFS Training Programs	Программы обучения IFS	IFS Training Programs
North American and International Programs	North American and International Programs	Североамериканские и международные программы	North American and International Programs
https://ifs-institute.com/trainings	https://ifs-institute.com/trainings	https://ifs-institute.com/trainings	https://ifs-institute.com/trainings
Other IFS Courses	Other IFS Courses	Другие курсы IFS	Other IFS Courses
Queer and Trans IFS	Queer and Trans IFS	Квир и транс IFS	Queer and Trans IFS
www.qtifs.com/	www.qtifs.com/	www.qtifs.com/	www.qtifs.com/
Faith-based IFS course for Black Women	Faith-based IFS course for Black Women	Религиозный курс IFS для чернокожих женщин	Faith-based IFS course for Black Women
www.liberationlane.com/community	www.liberationlane.com/community	www.liberationlane.com/community	www.liberationlane.com/community
IFS Workshops and Retreats	IFS Workshops and Retreats	Семинары и ретриты IFS	IFS Workshops and Retreats
IFS Institute	IFS Institute	Институт ИФС	IFS Institute
https://ifs-institute.com/news-events/events	https://ifs-institute.com/news-events/events	https://ifs-institute.com/news-events/events	https://ifs-institute.com/news-events/events
Life Architect	Life Architect	Жизнь Архитектора	Life Architect
https://lifearchitect.com/workshops/	https://lifearchitect.com/workshops/	https://lifearchitect.com/workshops/	https://lifearchitect.com/workshops/
Somatic IFS	Somatic IFS	Соматический ИФС	Somatic IFS
www.embodiedself.net/	www.embodiedself.net/	www.embodiedself.net/	www.embodiedself.net/
IFS-Based Recovery	IFS-Based Recovery	Восстановление на основе IFS	IFS-Based Recovery
Acqua Recovery www.acquarecovery.com/ifs-internal-family-systems-inner-child-work	Acqua Recovery www.acquarecovery.com/ifs-internal-family-systems-inner-child-work	Acqua Recovery www.acquarecovery.com/ifs-internal-family-systems-inner-child-work	Acqua Recovery www.acquarecovery.com/ifs-internal-family-systems-inner-child-work
Path	Path	Путь	Path
www.path2recovery.org/	www.path2recovery.org/	www.path2recovery.org/	www.path2recovery.org/
Latinx Healing Circles	Latinx Healing Circles	Латинские лечебные круги	Latinx Healing Circles
https://view.flodesk.com/emails/647f87ab660ad5702615da40	https://view.flodesk.com/emails/647f87ab660ad5702615da40	https://view.flodesk.com/emails/647f87ab660ad5702615da40	https://view.flodesk.com/emails/647f87ab660ad5702615da40
IFS Scale	IFS Scale	Шкала IFS	IFS Scale
www.ifs-scale.com/	www.ifs-scale.com/	www.ifs-scale.com/	www.ifs-scale.com/
IFS-Related Books and Articles	IFS-Related Books and Articles	Книги и статьи по IFS	IFS-Related Books and Articles
Gessel, Nityda. Embodied Self Awakening: Somatic Practices for Trauma Healing and Spiritual Evolution. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2023.	Gessel, Nityda. Embodied Self Awakening: Somatic Practices for Trauma Healing and Spiritual Evolution. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2023.	Гессель, Нитида. Воплощенное самопробуждение: соматические практики исцеления травм и духовной эволюции. Нью-Йорк: WW Norton & Company, 2023.	Gessel, Nityda. Embodied Self Awakening: Somatic Practices for Trauma Healing and Spiritual Evolution. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2023.
Glass, Michelle. Daily Parts Meditation Practice: A Journey of Embodied Integration for Clients and Therapists. Listen3r, 2016.	Glass, Michelle. Daily Parts Meditation Practice: A Journey of Embodied Integration for Clients and Therapists. Listen3r, 2016.	Гласс, Мишель. Практика медитации «Части дня: путь воплощенной интеграции для клиентов и терапевтов». Слушай3р, 2016.	Glass, Michelle. Daily Parts Meditation Practice: A Journey of Embodied Integration for Clients and Therapists. Listen3r, 2016.
Holmes, Tom, and Holmes, Lauri. Parts Work: An Illustrated Guide to Your Inner Life. Kalamazoo, MI: Winged Heart Press, 2007.	Holmes, Tom, and Holmes, Lauri. Parts Work: An Illustrated Guide to Your Inner Life. Kalamazoo, MI: Winged Heart Press, 2007.	Холмс Том и Холмс Лаури. Работа деталей: иллюстрированное руководство по вашей внутренней жизни. Каламазу, Мичиган: Winged Heart Press, 2007.	Holmes, Tom, and Holmes, Lauri. Parts Work: An Illustrated Guide to Your Inner Life. Kalamazoo, MI: Winged Heart Press, 2007.
Kahler, Richard S., and Glass, Michelle. “The New Kid on the Block: IFS Informed Financial Therapy.” Journal of Financial Therapy 14 (2023).	Kahler, Richard S., and Glass, Michelle. “The New Kid on the Block: IFS Informed Financial Therapy.” Journal of Financial Therapy 14 (2023).	Калер, Ричард С. и Гласс, Мишель. «Новенький в квартале: финансовая терапия, основанная на информации IFS». Журнал финансовой терапии 14 (2023).	Kahler, Richard S., and Glass, Michelle. “The New Kid on the Block: IFS Informed Financial Therapy.” Journal of Financial Therapy 14 (2023).
Kopald, Seth. Self-Led: Living a Connected Life with Yourself and with Others. An Application of Internal Family Systems. Exploration Services LLC, 2023.	Kopald, Seth. Self-Led: Living a Connected Life with Yourself and with Others. An Application of Internal Family Systems. Exploration Services LLC, 2023.	Копальд, Сет. Самостоятельное руководство: жизнь, связанная с самим собой и с другими. Применение внутренних семейных систем. ООО «Разведочные услуги», 2023 г.	Kopald, Seth. Self-Led: Living a Connected Life with Yourself and with Others. An Application of Internal Family Systems. Exploration Services LLC, 2023.
Redfern, Emma, and Foot, Helen. Freeing Self: IFS Beyond the Therapy Room. B.C. Allen Publishing and Tonic Books, 2023.	Redfern, Emma, and Foot, Helen. Freeing Self: IFS Beyond the Therapy Room. B.C. Allen Publishing and Tonic Books, 2023.	Редферн, Эмма и Фут, Хелен. Освобождение себя: IFS за пределами терапевтической комнаты. до нашей эры Allen Publishing и Tonic Books, 2023.	Redfern, Emma, and Foot, Helen. Freeing Self: IFS Beyond the Therapy Room. B.C. Allen Publishing and Tonic Books, 2023.
Schwartz, Richard C. Greater Than the Sum of Our Parts. Louisville, CO: Sounds True, 2018.	Schwartz, Richard C. Greater Than the Sum of Our Parts. Louisville, CO: Sounds True, 2018.	Шварц, Ричард К. Больше, чем сумма наших частей. Луисвилл, Колорадо: звучит правдоподобно, 2018 г.	Schwartz, Richard C. Greater Than the Sum of Our Parts. Louisville, CO: Sounds True, 2018.
Schwartz, Richard C., and Sweezy, Martha. Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition. New York: Guilford Press. 2019.	Schwartz, Richard C., and Sweezy, Martha. Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition. New York: Guilford Press. 2019.	Шварц, Ричард К. и Суизи, Марта. Внутренняя семейная системная терапия, второе издание. Нью-Йорк: Гилфорд Пресс. 2019.	Schwartz, Richard C., and Sweezy, Martha. Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition. New York: Guilford Press. 2019.
Schwartz, Richard C. No Bad Parts: Healing Trauma and Restoring Wholeness with the Internal Systems Model. Louisville, CO: Sounds True, 2021.	Schwartz, Richard C. No Bad Parts: Healing Trauma and Restoring Wholeness with the Internal Systems Model. Louisville, CO: Sounds True, 2021.	Шварц, Ричард К. Никаких плохих частей: исцеление травм и восстановление целостности с помощью модели внутренних систем. Луисвилл, Колорадо: звучит правдоподобно, 2021 г.	Schwartz, Richard C. No Bad Parts: Healing Trauma and Restoring Wholeness with the Internal Systems Model. Louisville, CO: Sounds True, 2021.
Steege, Mary K., and Schwartz, Ricard C. The Spirit-Led Life: Christianity and the Internal Family Systems. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2010.	Steege, Mary K., and Schwartz, Ricard C. The Spirit-Led Life: Christianity and the Internal Family Systems. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2010.	Стидж, Мэри К., и Шварц, Рикар К. Жизнь, ведомая Духом: христианство и внутренние семейные системы. Независимая издательская платформа CreateSpace, 2010 г.	Steege, Mary K., and Schwartz, Ricard C. The Spirit-Led Life: Christianity and the Internal Family Systems. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, 2010.
IFS Books for Children	IFS Books for Children	Книги IFS для детей	IFS Books for Children
Jimenez-Pride, Carmen. Emerson The Embodied Elephant. Play Therapy with Carmen, 2023.	Jimenez-Pride, Carmen. Emerson The Embodied Elephant. Play Therapy with Carmen, 2023.	Хименес-Прайд, Кармен. Эмерсон Воплощенный слон. Игровая терапия с Кармен, 2023.	Jimenez-Pride, Carmen. Emerson The Embodied Elephant. Play Therapy with Carmen, 2023.
Patryas, Laura. The 8 Superpowers Inside Me. Independently published, 2023.	Patryas, Laura. The 8 Superpowers Inside Me. Independently published, 2023.	Патряс, Лаура. 8 суперспособностей внутри меня. Независимое издание, 2023 г.	Patryas, Laura. The 8 Superpowers Inside Me. Independently published, 2023.
IFS Parts Cards	IFS Parts Cards	Карточки запчастей IFS	IFS Parts Cards
Eckstein, Sharon. Inner Active Cards. Lawton Michigan: Backwoods Press, 2018.	Eckstein, Sharon. Inner Active Cards. Lawton Michigan: Backwoods Press, 2018.	Экстайн, Шэрон. Внутренние активные карты. Лоутон, Мичиган: Backwoods Press, 2018.	Eckstein, Sharon. Inner Active Cards. Lawton Michigan: Backwoods Press, 2018.
Jumanne-Marshall, Kenjji, Holmes, Tom, and Mirsky, Karina. Black Experiences: Cards for Parts Work. 2023.	Jumanne-Marshall, Kenjji, Holmes, Tom, and Mirsky, Karina. Black Experiences: Cards for Parts Work. 2023.	Джуманн-Маршалл, Кенджи, Холмс, Том и Мирски, Карина. Черный опыт: карты для работы с деталями. 2023.	Jumanne-Marshall, Kenjji, Holmes, Tom, and Mirsky, Karina. Black Experiences: Cards for Parts Work. 2023.
Podcasts	Podcasts	Подкасты	Podcasts
Brown Girls Don’t Do Therapy	Brown Girls Don’t Do Therapy	Коричневые девушки не проходят терапию	Brown Girls Don’t Do Therapy
www.instagram.com/browngirlsdontdotherapypodcast/	www.instagram.com/browngirlsdontdotherapypodcast/	www.instagram.com/browngirlsdontdotherapypodcast/	www.instagram.com/browngirlsdontdotherapypodcast/
A podcast designed by a brown girl who happens to be a therapist to educate, empower, and support listeners to reconnect with their authentic selves. It explores how internal family systems (IFS) therapy or “parts work” can support people to find peace, harmony, and love in their life. This podcast is born from the need to break down the continued stigma of going to therapy in many BIPOC communities, and normalize that mental health is health. The host, Diviya Lewis, is a Registered Psychotherapist in Canada and a Certified IFS Therapist.	A podcast designed by a brown girl who happens to be a therapist to educate, empower, and support listeners to reconnect with their authentic selves. It explores how internal family systems (IFS) therapy or “parts work” can support people to find peace, harmony, and love in their life. This podcast is born from the need to break down the continued stigma of going to therapy in many BIPOC communities, and normalize that mental health is health. The host, Diviya Lewis, is a Registered Psychotherapist in Canada and a Certified IFS Therapist.	Подкаст, созданный смуглой девушкой, которая работает терапевтом, чтобы обучать, расширять возможности и поддерживать слушателей в воссоединении со своей подлинной сущностью. В нем исследуется, как терапия внутренних семейных систем (IFS), или «работа частей», может помочь людям обрести мир, гармонию и любовь в своей жизни. Этот подкаст родился из необходимости разрушить сохраняющуюся стигму обращения к терапии во многих сообществах BIPOC и нормализовать представление о том, что психическое здоровье — это здоровье. Ведущая, Дивия Льюис, является зарегистрированным психотерапевтом в Канаде и сертифицированным терапевтом IFS.	A podcast designed by a brown girl who happens to be a therapist to educate, empower, and support listeners to reconnect with their authentic selves. It explores how internal family systems (IFS) therapy or “parts work” can support people to find peace, harmony, and love in their life. This podcast is born from the need to break down the continued stigma of going to therapy in many BIPOC communities, and normalize that mental health is health. The host, Diviya Lewis, is a Registered Psychotherapist in Canada and a Certified IFS Therapist.
The One Inside: An Internal Family Systems https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/the-one-inside-an-internal-family-systems-ifs-podcast/id1460334766	The One Inside: An Internal Family Systems https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/the-one-inside-an-internal-family-systems-ifs-podcast/id1460334766	Тот, кто внутри: внутренние семейные системы https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/the-one-inside-an-internal-family-systems-ifs-podcast/id1460334766	The One Inside: An Internal Family Systems https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/the-one-inside-an-internal-family-systems-ifs-podcast/id1460334766
The One Inside: An Internal Family Systems podcast is for anyone looking to find balance and harmony. IFS can help you understand the tug-of-war within your mind and rediscover your natural calm, creativity, and clarity. IFS can also heal the parts of you who hold pain.	The One Inside: An Internal Family Systems podcast is for anyone looking to find balance and harmony. IFS can help you understand the tug-of-war within your mind and rediscover your natural calm, creativity, and clarity. IFS can also heal the parts of you who hold pain.	Подкаст The One Inside: Внутренние семейные системы предназначен для всех, кто хочет найти баланс и гармонию. IFS может помочь вам понять перетягивание каната в вашем уме и заново открыть для себя естественное спокойствие, креативность и ясность ума. IFS также может исцелить те части вашего тела, которые испытывают боль.	The One Inside: An Internal Family Systems podcast is for anyone looking to find balance and harmony. IFS can help you understand the tug-of-war within your mind and rediscover your natural calm, creativity, and clarity. IFS can also heal the parts of you who hold pain.
IFS Talks	IFS Talks	Переговоры IFS	IFS Talks
https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/ifs-talks/id1481000501	https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/ifs-talks/id1481000501	https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/ifs-talks/id1481000501	https://podcasts.apple.com/au/podcast/ifs-talks/id1481000501
IFS Talks is an audio series to deepen connections with the Internal Family Systems Model through conversations with lead trainers, authors, practitioners, and users.	IFS Talks is an audio series to deepen connections with the Internal Family Systems Model through conversations with lead trainers, authors, practitioners, and users.	IFS Talks — это аудиосерия, призванная углубить связь с моделью внутренних семейных систем посредством бесед с ведущими тренерами, авторами, практиками и пользователями.	IFS Talks is an audio series to deepen connections with the Internal Family Systems Model through conversations with lead trainers, authors, practitioners, and users.
The Financial Therapy Podcast	The Financial Therapy Podcast	Подкаст о финансовой терапии	The Financial Therapy Podcast
https://thefinancialtherapypodcast.com/	https://thefinancialtherapypodcast.com/	https://thefinancialtherapypodcast.com/	https://thefinancialtherapypodcast.com/
The Financial Therapy Podcast blends the nuts and bolts of financial advice with the emotions that drive financial decisions.	The Financial Therapy Podcast blends the nuts and bolts of financial advice with the emotions that drive financial decisions.	Подкаст «Финансовая терапия» сочетает в себе основные финансовые советы и эмоции, которые определяют финансовые решения.	The Financial Therapy Podcast blends the nuts and bolts of financial advice with the emotions that drive financial decisions.
YouTube Channels	YouTube Channels	YouTube-каналы	YouTube Channels
IFS Español: www.youtube.com/channel/UCehvJspi8LHMvh-mOpVp5mg	IFS Español: www.youtube.com/channel/UCehvJspi8LHMvh-mOpVp5mg	IFS Español: www.youtube.com/channel/UCehvJspi8LHMvh-mOpVp5mg	IFS Español: www.youtube.com/channel/UCehvJspi8LHMvh-mOpVp5mg
Self-Led Parenting: www.youtube.com/watch?v=OIWO_vbFEys	Self-Led Parenting: www.youtube.com/watch?v=OIWO_vbFEys	Самостоятельное воспитание: www.youtube.com/watch?v=OIWO_vbFEys	Self-Led Parenting: www.youtube.com/watch?v=OIWO_vbFEys
Free Download	Free Download	Бесплатная загрузка	Free Download
Validation Parts Work with Self and Others https://theshiftlesswanderer.com/the-practice-process-of-validation	Validation Parts Work with Self and Others https://theshiftlesswanderer.com/the-practice-process-of-validation	Части проверки работают с самим собой и другими https://theshiftlesswanderer.com/the-practice-process-of-validation	Validation Parts Work with Self and Others https://theshiftlesswanderer.com/the-practice-process-of-validation
Glossary	Glossary	Глоссарий	Glossary
Ancestral lineage healing: A specific ritualized way to connect with wise ancestors to heal intergenerational trauma and reclaim and embody centuries of lost ancestral wisdom and guidance.	Ancestral lineage healing: A specific ritualized way to connect with wise ancestors to heal intergenerational trauma and reclaim and embody centuries of lost ancestral wisdom and guidance.	Исцеление родословной: особый ритуальный способ связи с мудрыми предками, чтобы исцелить травмы, перенесенные из поколения в поколение, а также вернуть и воплотить столетия утраченной мудрости и руководства предков.	Ancestral lineage healing: A specific ritualized way to connect with wise ancestors to heal intergenerational trauma and reclaim and embody centuries of lost ancestral wisdom and guidance.
Befriending: Extending Self-energy to connect with a part to create a Self-to-part relationship and get to know the part.	Befriending: Extending Self-energy to connect with a part to create a Self-to-part relationship and get to know the part.	Дружба: расширение энергии «Я» для соединения с частью, создания отношений «Я-часть» и знакомства с этой частью.	Befriending: Extending Self-energy to connect with a part to create a Self-to-part relationship and get to know the part.
Blending: When the feelings, beliefs, and energies of a part are in the seat of consciousness and block access to Self.	Blending: When the feelings, beliefs, and energies of a part are in the seat of consciousness and block access to Self.	Смешение: когда чувства, убеждения и энергии части находятся в центре сознания и блокируют доступ к «Я».	Blending: When the feelings, beliefs, and energies of a part are in the seat of consciousness and block access to Self.
Burden: The extreme beliefs, thoughts, and perspectives parts take on because of trauma, attachment injury, and devaluing experiences.	Burden: The extreme beliefs, thoughts, and perspectives parts take on because of trauma, attachment injury, and devaluing experiences.	Бремя: крайние убеждения, мысли и точки зрения возникают из-за травм, травм привязанности и обесценивающего опыта.	Burden: The extreme beliefs, thoughts, and perspectives parts take on because of trauma, attachment injury, and devaluing experiences.
Cultural burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts absorbed through interactions with the dominant culture and/or society.	Cultural burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts absorbed through interactions with the dominant culture and/or society.	Культурное бремя: Негативные убеждения, эмоции и энергии частей, поглощенные взаимодействием с доминирующей культурой и/или обществом.	Cultural burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts absorbed through interactions with the dominant culture and/or society.
Direct Access: Creating a Self-to-part relationship between the Self of another, usually an IFS therapist or practitioner, and your parts. Parts remain blended.	Direct Access: Creating a Self-to-part relationship between the Self of another, usually an IFS therapist or practitioner, and your parts. Parts remain blended.	Прямой доступ: создание отношений «Я-часть» между «Я» другого человека, обычно терапевта или практикующего специалиста IFS, и вашими частями. Части остаются смешанными.	Direct Access: Creating a Self-to-part relationship between the Self of another, usually an IFS therapist or practitioner, and your parts. Parts remain blended.
Do-over: A reworking of a traumatic experience in the presence of a compassionate witness. Also referred to as an emotionally corrective experience.	Do-over: A reworking of a traumatic experience in the presence of a compassionate witness. Also referred to as an emotionally corrective experience.	Повтор: переработка травматического опыта в присутствии сострадательного свидетеля. Также называется эмоционально корректирующим опытом.	Do-over: A reworking of a traumatic experience in the presence of a compassionate witness. Also referred to as an emotionally corrective experience.
Exile: Typically, a young part who has experienced trauma and is kept out of awareness for fear that their pain will overwhelm the system.	Exile: Typically, a young part who has experienced trauma and is kept out of awareness for fear that their pain will overwhelm the system.	Изгнанник: Как правило, молодая часть, которая пережила травму и находится в неведении из-за страха, что их боль сокрушит систему.	Exile: Typically, a young part who has experienced trauma and is kept out of awareness for fear that their pain will overwhelm the system.
Fears: Identifying and addressing the fears of parts that impede relationship building and/or healing.	Fears: Identifying and addressing the fears of parts that impede relationship building and/or healing.	Страхи: выявление и устранение страхов тех частей, которые мешают построению и/или исцелению отношений.	Fears: Identifying and addressing the fears of parts that impede relationship building and/or healing.
Feel Toward: Noticing how you feel toward the part.	Feel Toward: Noticing how you feel toward the part.	Чувствовать себя: обращать внимание на то, как вы себя чувствуете по отношению к этой роли.	Feel Toward: Noticing how you feel toward the part.
Find: Going inside to notice the part in or around your body.	Find: Going inside to notice the part in or around your body.	Находка: Загляните внутрь и обратите внимание на часть тела внутри или вокруг него.	Find: Going inside to notice the part in or around your body.
Firefighter: A part who responds in extreme reactive ways when the pain of exiled parts is expressed or experienced by the system.	Firefighter: A part who responds in extreme reactive ways when the pain of exiled parts is expressed or experienced by the system.	Пожарный: Часть, которая крайне реактивно реагирует, когда система выражает или испытывает боль изгнанных частей.	Firefighter: A part who responds in extreme reactive ways when the pain of exiled parts is expressed or experienced by the system.
Flesh Out: Deepening the Self-to-part relationship with the part by extending increased Self-energy (the qualities of Self) and learning what the part wants to share about itself.	Flesh Out: Deepening the Self-to-part relationship with the part by extending increased Self-energy (the qualities of Self) and learning what the part wants to share about itself.	Выявление плоти: углубление отношений «Я-часть» с частью путем увеличения энергии «Я» (качеств «Я») и изучения того, чем часть хочет поделиться о себе.	Flesh Out: Deepening the Self-to-part relationship with the part by extending increased Self-energy (the qualities of Self) and learning what the part wants to share about itself.
Focus: After finding the part, bringing awareness to the part to see what more you notice or experience.	Focus: After finding the part, bringing awareness to the part to see what more you notice or experience.	Фокус: после обнаружения части сосредоточьте внимание на этой части, чтобы увидеть, что еще вы замечаете или испытываете.	Focus: After finding the part, bringing awareness to the part to see what more you notice or experience.
Going inside: A turning of attention from the external to your inner world. This can involve closing your eyes, softening your gaze, looking downward, or simply sitting quietly and noticing what’s happening inside of you.	Going inside: A turning of attention from the external to your inner world. This can involve closing your eyes, softening your gaze, looking downward, or simply sitting quietly and noticing what’s happening inside of you.	Вход внутрь: переключение внимания с внешнего на свой внутренний мир. Это может включать в себя закрытие глаз, смягчение взгляда, взгляд вниз или просто тихое сидение и наблюдение за тем, что происходит внутри вас.	Going inside: A turning of attention from the external to your inner world. This can involve closing your eyes, softening your gaze, looking downward, or simply sitting quietly and noticing what’s happening inside of you.
In-sight: Creating a Self-to-part relationship between your Self and your parts. This requires the part to unblend or separate from Self.	In-sight: Creating a Self-to-part relationship between your Self and your parts. This requires the part to unblend or separate from Self.	Прозрение: создание отношений «Я-части» между вашим «Я» и вашими частями. Это требует, чтобы часть разделилась или отделилась от «Я».	In-sight: Creating a Self-to-part relationship between your Self and your parts. This requires the part to unblend or separate from Self.
Integration: The reorganization of the internal system to accommodate the new roles of parts after unburdening.	Integration: The reorganization of the internal system to accommodate the new roles of parts after unburdening.	Интеграция: реорганизация внутренней системы для соответствия новым функциям частей после разгрузки.	Integration: The reorganization of the internal system to accommodate the new roles of parts after unburdening.
Intention: Commitments made between Self and parts to continue their relationship after an unburdening.	Intention: Commitments made between Self and parts to continue their relationship after an unburdening.	Намерение: обязательства между «Я» и частями продолжать отношения после освобождения от бремени.	Intention: Commitments made between Self and parts to continue their relationship after an unburdening.
Internal Family Systems Therapy: A model of psychotherapy that holds that everyone has parts and a wise Self capable of healing and guiding your internal family of parts.	Internal Family Systems Therapy: A model of psychotherapy that holds that everyone has parts and a wise Self capable of healing and guiding your internal family of parts.	Внутренняя семейная системная терапия: модель психотерапии, которая утверждает, что у каждого есть части и мудрое Я, способное исцелять и направлять вашу внутреннюю семью, состоящую из частей.	Internal Family Systems Therapy: A model of psychotherapy that holds that everyone has parts and a wise Self capable of healing and guiding your internal family of parts.
Invitation: Inviting essential qualities that were lost or obscured because of the burden the part carried prior to unburdening.	Invitation: Inviting essential qualities that were lost or obscured because of the burden the part carried prior to unburdening.	Приглашение: приглашение существенных качеств, которые были потеряны или скрыты из-за бремени, которое эта часть несла до освобождения.	Invitation: Inviting essential qualities that were lost or obscured because of the burden the part carried prior to unburdening.
Legacy burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts passed down through familial and ancestral lines.	Legacy burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts passed down through familial and ancestral lines.	Бремя наследия: негативные убеждения, эмоции и энергии частей, передаваемые по семейным и наследственным линиям.	Legacy burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts passed down through familial and ancestral lines.
Legacy gift: Positive qualities of parts passed down through familial and ancestral lines. Also known as legacy heirlooms.	Legacy gift: Positive qualities of parts passed down through familial and ancestral lines. Also known as legacy heirlooms.	Дар наследия: Положительные качества частей, передаваемые по семейным и наследственным линиям. Также известны как наследственные реликвии.	Legacy gift: Positive qualities of parts passed down through familial and ancestral lines. Also known as legacy heirlooms.
Manager: A part who responds in extreme proactive ways to keep you from experiencing the pain of exiled parts.	Manager: A part who responds in extreme proactive ways to keep you from experiencing the pain of exiled parts.	Менеджер: Часть, которая реагирует крайне активно, чтобы вы не испытывали боль изгнанных частей.	Manager: A part who responds in extreme proactive ways to keep you from experiencing the pain of exiled parts.
Part: A subpersonality you were born with who has feelings, thoughts, sensations, memories, speech, and many other qualities.	Part: A subpersonality you were born with who has feelings, thoughts, sensations, memories, speech, and many other qualities.	Часть: Субличность, с которой вы родились, обладающая чувствами, мыслями, ощущениями, воспоминаниями, речью и многими другими качествами.	Part: A subpersonality you were born with who has feelings, thoughts, sensations, memories, speech, and many other qualities.
Personal burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts taken on because of their own traumatic and/or devaluing experiences.	Personal burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts taken on because of their own traumatic and/or devaluing experiences.	Личное бремя: Негативные убеждения, эмоции и энергии частей, возникшие из-за их собственного травмирующего и/или обесценивающего опыта.	Personal burden: Negative beliefs, emotions, and energies of parts taken on because of their own traumatic and/or devaluing experiences.
Polarization: A relationship between two or more parts holding opposing views, beliefs, and behaviors.	Polarization: A relationship between two or more parts holding opposing views, beliefs, and behaviors.	Поляризация: отношения между двумя или более частями, придерживающимися противоположных взглядов, убеждений и поведения.	Polarization: A relationship between two or more parts holding opposing views, beliefs, and behaviors.
Protector parts: Parts who have been forced into extreme roles to protect you and other parts due to trauma and/or devaluing life experiences.	Protector parts: Parts who have been forced into extreme roles to protect you and other parts due to trauma and/or devaluing life experiences.	Части-защитники: Части, которые были вынуждены играть экстремальную роль, чтобы защитить вас и другие части из-за травмы и/или обесценивания жизненного опыта.	Protector parts: Parts who have been forced into extreme roles to protect you and other parts due to trauma and/or devaluing life experiences.
Retrieval: An offer to bring a stuck or frozen exiled part out of a past trauma scene to a safe place of its choice.	Retrieval: An offer to bring a stuck or frozen exiled part out of a past trauma scene to a safe place of its choice.	Возврат: предложение перенести застрявшую или замороженную изгнанную часть из места прошлой травмы в безопасное место по ее выбору.	Retrieval: An offer to bring a stuck or frozen exiled part out of a past trauma scene to a safe place of its choice.
Self: It is who you are when you are unblended from extreme parts. It is unaffected by past traumas, and it can heal them.	Self: It is who you are when you are unblended from extreme parts. It is unaffected by past traumas, and it can heal them.	Я: Это то, кем вы являетесь, когда вы отделены от крайностей. На него не влияют прошлые травмы, и он может их исцелить.	Self: It is who you are when you are unblended from extreme parts. It is unaffected by past traumas, and it can heal them.
Self-leadership: When Self is in the seat of consciousness leading the system with wisdom, compassion, and intuition.	Self-leadership: When Self is in the seat of consciousness leading the system with wisdom, compassion, and intuition.	Самолидерство: когда «Я» находится на месте сознания, руководя системой с мудростью, состраданием и интуицией.	Self-leadership: When Self is in the seat of consciousness leading the system with wisdom, compassion, and intuition.
Self-like part: Manager parts who possess qualities like Self. They are empathic rather than compassionate and do not have the ability to heal the system.	Self-like part: Manager parts who possess qualities like Self. They are empathic rather than compassionate and do not have the ability to heal the system.	Самоподобная часть: Части менеджера, обладающие такими качествами, как «Я». Они скорее эмпатичны, чем сострадательны, и не обладают способностью исцелять систему.	Self-like part: Manager parts who possess qualities like Self. They are empathic rather than compassionate and do not have the ability to heal the system.
Unblending: The process of a part separating from Self.	Unblending: The process of a part separating from Self.	Растворение: процесс отделения части от себя.	Unblending: The process of a part separating from Self.
Unburdening: The process by which exiles and protectors release their burdens.	Unburdening: The process by which exiles and protectors release their burdens.	Освобождение: процесс, посредством которого изгнанники и защитники снимают свое бремя.	Unburdening: The process by which exiles and protectors release their burdens.
Updating: Sharing with parts what has happened in your life since the time where they are stuck or frozen.	Updating: Sharing with parts what has happened in your life since the time where they are stuck or frozen.	Обновление: поделитесь с частями тем, что произошло в вашей жизни с тех пор, как они застряли или застыли.	Updating: Sharing with parts what has happened in your life since the time where they are stuck or frozen.
U-turn: The pause to notice what is happening inside when activated and allowing space to unblend.	U-turn: The pause to notice what is happening inside when activated and allowing space to unblend.	Разворот: пауза, позволяющая заметить, что происходит внутри, при активации и позволить пространству раствориться.	U-turn: The pause to notice what is happening inside when activated and allowing space to unblend.
Witnessing: The beginning of the healing process for exiles, where they tell their story to a compassionate, curious, calm, and connected listener and witness.	Witnessing: The beginning of the healing process for exiles, where they tell their story to a compassionate, curious, calm, and connected listener and witness.	Свидетельствование: начало процесса исцеления изгнанников, когда они рассказывают свою историю сострадательному, любопытному, спокойному и связанному слушателю и свидетелю.	Witnessing: The beginning of the healing process for exiles, where they tell their story to a compassionate, curious, calm, and connected listener and witness.
Endnotes	Endnotes	Сноски	Endnotes
Chapter 1	Chapter 1	Глава 1	Chapter 1
1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Ричард К. Шварц и Марта Суизи, Внутренняя семейная системная терапия (Нью-Йорк: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).
2. Ibid.	2. Ibid.	2. Там же.	2. Ibid.
3. www.kwawjamari.com	3. www.kwawjamari.com	3. www.kwawjamari.com	3. www.kwawjamari.com
4. Ancestral Medicine, https://ancestralmedicine.org/.	4. Ancestral Medicine, https://ancestralmedicine.org/.	4. Наследственная медицина, https://ancestralmedicine.org/.	4. Ancestral Medicine, https://ancestralmedicine.org/.
5. Daniel Foor, Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing (Rochester, VT: Bear & Company, 2017).	5. Daniel Foor, Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing (Rochester, VT: Bear & Company, 2017).	5. Дэниел Фур, «Медицина предков: ритуалы для личного и семейного исцеления» (Рочестер, Вирджиния: Bear & Company, 2017).	5. Daniel Foor, Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing (Rochester, VT: Bear & Company, 2017).
6. Richard C. Schwartz, Introduction to the Internal Family Systems Model (Oak Park, IL: Trailheads Publications, 2001).	6. Richard C. Schwartz, Introduction to the Internal Family Systems Model (Oak Park, IL: Trailheads Publications, 2001).	6. Ричард К. Шварц, Введение в модель внутренних семейных систем (Оук-Парк, Иллинойс: Trailheads Publications, 2001).	6. Richard C. Schwartz, Introduction to the Internal Family Systems Model (Oak Park, IL: Trailheads Publications, 2001).
7. Gina Ryder, “What Is Attachment Trauma?” PsychCentral, January 19, 2022.	7. Gina Ryder, “What Is Attachment Trauma?” PsychCentral, January 19, 2022.	7. Джина Райдер, «Что такое травма привязанности?» PsychCentral, 19 января 2022 г.	7. Gina Ryder, “What Is Attachment Trauma?” PsychCentral, January 19, 2022.
Chapter 3	Chapter 3	Глава 3	Chapter 3
1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Ричард К. Шварц и Марта Суизи, Внутренняя семейная системная терапия (Нью-Йорк: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).
Chapter 4	Chapter 4	Глава 4	Chapter 4
1. Richard C. Schwartz, IFS Level 1. 8Cs Qualities of Self [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: The Center for Self-Leadership, 2018).	1. Richard C. Schwartz, IFS Level 1. 8Cs Qualities of Self [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: The Center for Self-Leadership, 2018).	1. Ричард К. Шварц, Уровень 1 IFS. Качества личности 8Cs [учебный материал] (Оук-Парк, Иллинойс: Центр самостоятельного лидерства, 2018).	1. Richard C. Schwartz, IFS Level 1. 8Cs Qualities of Self [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: The Center for Self-Leadership, 2018).
2. Julia Sullivan, IFS Level 1: 8Cs Worksheet [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: The Center for Self-Leadership, 2018).	2. Julia Sullivan, IFS Level 1: 8Cs Worksheet [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: The Center for Self-Leadership, 2018).	2. Джулия Салливан, Уровень 1 IFS: Рабочий лист 8Cs [учебный материал] (Оук-Парк, Иллинойс: Центр самоуправления, 2018).	2. Julia Sullivan, IFS Level 1: 8Cs Worksheet [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: The Center for Self-Leadership, 2018).
Chapter 8	Chapter 8	Глава 8	Chapter 8
1. John E. Sarno, The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain (New York: Warner Books, 1998).	1. John E. Sarno, The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain (New York: Warner Books, 1998).	1. Джон Э. Сарно, Рецепт тела разума: исцеление тела, исцеление боли (Нью-Йорк: Warner Books, 1998).	1. John E. Sarno, The Mindbody Prescription: Healing the Body, Healing the Pain (New York: Warner Books, 1998).
2. David Schechter, The MindBody Workbook: A Thirty Day Program of Insight and Awareness for People with Back Pain and Other Disorders (Culver City, CA: MindBody Medicine Publications, 1999).	2. David Schechter, The MindBody Workbook: A Thirty Day Program of Insight and Awareness for People with Back Pain and Other Disorders (Culver City, CA: MindBody Medicine Publications, 1999).	2. Дэвид Шехтер, Рабочая тетрадь MindBody: Тридцатидневная программа понимания и осведомленности для людей с болями в спине и другими расстройствами (Калвер-Сити, Калифорния: MindBody Medicine Publications, 1999).	2. David Schechter, The MindBody Workbook: A Thirty Day Program of Insight and Awareness for People with Back Pain and Other Disorders (Culver City, CA: MindBody Medicine Publications, 1999).
3. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	3. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	3. Ричард К. Шварц и Марта Суизи, Внутренняя семейная системная терапия (Нью-Йорк: The Guilford Press, 2020).	3. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).
4. Ibid.	4. Ibid.	4. Там же.	4. Ibid.
Chapter 9	Chapter 9	Глава 9	Chapter 9
1. Pam Krause, IFS Level 2 Deepening and Expanding. Hope Merchant Steps [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: IFS Institute, 2022).	1. Pam Krause, IFS Level 2 Deepening and Expanding. Hope Merchant Steps [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: IFS Institute, 2022).	1. Пэм Краузе, IFS Level 2 «Углубление и расширение». Шаги торговца надеждой [обучающий материал] (Оук-Парк, Иллинойс: Институт IFS, 2022 г.).	1. Pam Krause, IFS Level 2 Deepening and Expanding. Hope Merchant Steps [Training Handout] (Oak Park, IL: IFS Institute, 2022).
Chapter 11	Chapter 11	Глава 11	Chapter 11
1. Ann L. Sinko, “Legacy Burden,” chapter, in Innovations and Elaborations in Internal Family Systems Therapy, eds. Martha Sweezy and Ellen L. Ziskind (New York: Routledge, 2016).	1. Ann L. Sinko, “Legacy Burden,” chapter, in Innovations and Elaborations in Internal Family Systems Therapy, eds. Martha Sweezy and Ellen L. Ziskind (New York: Routledge, 2016).	1. Энн Л. Синко, глава «Бремя наследия», в книге «Инновации и разработки во внутренней семейной системной терапии», под ред. Марта Суизи и Эллен Л. Зискинд (Нью-Йорк: Routledge, 2016).	1. Ann L. Sinko, “Legacy Burden,” chapter, in Innovations and Elaborations in Internal Family Systems Therapy, eds. Martha Sweezy and Ellen L. Ziskind (New York: Routledge, 2016).
2. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	2. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	2. Ричард К. Шварц и Марта Суизи, Внутренняя семейная системная терапия (Нью-Йорк: The Guilford Press, 2020).	2. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).
3. Martinque K. Jones, Keoshia J. Harris, and Akilah A. Reynolds, “In Their Own Words: The Meaning of the Strong Black Woman Schema among Black U.S. College Women,” Sex Roles 84, no. 5–6 (June 20, 2020): 347–59, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-020-01170-w.	3. Martinque K. Jones, Keoshia J. Harris, and Akilah A. Reynolds, “In Their Own Words: The Meaning of the Strong Black Woman Schema among Black U.S. College Women,” Sex Roles 84, no. 5–6 (June 20, 2020): 347–59, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-020-01170-w.	3. Мартинке К. Джонс, Кеошия Дж. Харрис и Акила А. Рейнольдс, «Их своими словами: значение схемы сильной чернокожей женщины среди чернокожих студенток колледжа США», «Сексуальные роли» 84, вып. 5–6 (20 июня 2020 г.): 347–59, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-020-01170-w.	3. Martinque K. Jones, Keoshia J. Harris, and Akilah A. Reynolds, “In Their Own Words: The Meaning of the Strong Black Woman Schema among Black U.S. College Women,” Sex Roles 84, no. 5–6 (June 20, 2020): 347–59, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-020-01170-w.
4. Marita Golden, The Strong Black Woman: How a Myth Endangers the Physical and Mental Health of Black Women (Coral Gables, FL: Mango Publishing, 2021).	4. Marita Golden, The Strong Black Woman: How a Myth Endangers the Physical and Mental Health of Black Women (Coral Gables, FL: Mango Publishing, 2021).	4. Марита Голден, Сильная чернокожая женщина: как миф ставит под угрозу физическое и психическое здоровье чернокожих женщин (Корал-Гейблс, Флорида: Mango Publishing, 2021).	4. Marita Golden, The Strong Black Woman: How a Myth Endangers the Physical and Mental Health of Black Women (Coral Gables, FL: Mango Publishing, 2021).
5. Sinko, “Legacy Burden.”	5. Sinko, “Legacy Burden.”	5. Синько, «Бремя наследия».	5. Sinko, “Legacy Burden.”
Chapter 13	Chapter 13	Глава 13	Chapter 13
1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Ричард К. Шварц и Марта Суизи, Внутренняя семейная системная терапия (Нью-Йорк: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).
Chapter 14	Chapter 14	Глава 14	Chapter 14
1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Ричард К. Шварц и Марта Суизи, Внутренняя семейная системная терапия (Нью-Йорк: The Guilford Press, 2020).	1. Richard C. Schwartz and Martha Sweezy, Internal Family Systems Therapy (New York: The Guilford Press, 2020).
Index	Index	Индекс	Index
A	A	А	A
Africans, cultural legacy burdens and, 156–158	Africans, cultural legacy burdens and, 156–158	Африканцы, бремя культурного наследия и, 156–158	Africans, cultural legacy burdens and, 156–158
ancestors	ancestors	предки	ancestors
access to Self and, 56	access to Self and, 56	доступ к себе и, 56	access to Self and, 56
Ancestor Guide, 8–10	Ancestor Guide, 8–10	Путеводитель по предкам, 8–10	Ancestor Guide, 8–10
ancestral lineage healing, benefits, 1–2	ancestral lineage healing, benefits, 1–2	исцеление родословной, преимущества, 1–2	ancestral lineage healing, benefits, 1–2
ancestral lineage healing, defined, 6, 209	ancestral lineage healing, defined, 6, 209	Исцеление наследственной линии, определение, 6, 209	ancestral lineage healing, defined, 6, 209
author’s experience with, 2–4, 6–10, 14–15 (see also meditations)	author’s experience with, 2–4, 6–10, 14–15 (see also meditations)	опыт автора, 2–4, 6–10, 14–15 (см. также медитации)	author’s experience with, 2–4, 6–10, 14–15 (see also meditations)
meditations used to communicate with, 6, 10–13	meditations used to communicate with, 6, 10–13	медитации, используемые для общения, 6, 10–13	meditations used to communicate with, 6, 10–13
Writing Clan of author’s ancestors, 12, 201	Writing Clan of author’s ancestors, 12, 201	Письменный Род предков автора, 12, 201	Writing Clan of author’s ancestors, 12, 201
Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing (Foor), 6	Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing (Foor), 6	Родовая медицина: Ритуалы для личного и семейного исцеления (Фур), 6	Ancestral Medicine: Rituals for Personal and Family Healing (Foor), 6
“Antsy” part experience, 65–66, 75–78, 80–81, 182	“Antsy” part experience, 65–66, 75–78, 80–81, 182	Опыт партии «Анти», 65–66, 75–78, 80–81, 182	“Antsy” part experience, 65–66, 75–78, 80–81, 182
anxiety	anxiety	беспокойство	anxiety
Go-Along-to-Get-Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186	Go-Along-to-Get-Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186	Идти-ладить-ладить против Бульдога (пример случая), 95–99, 185–186	Go-Along-to-Get-Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186
as legacy burden (case vignette), 151–153	as legacy burden (case vignette), 151–153	как бремя наследства (пример случая), 151–153	as legacy burden (case vignette), 151–153
as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151	as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151	в качестве личного бремени (пример случая), 150–151	as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151
The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177	The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177	Ребенок на замену (пример случая), 174–177.	The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177
Assumptions of IFS, 16–18	Assumptions of IFS, 16–18	Допущения IFS, 16–18	Assumptions of IFS, 16–18
B	B	Б	B
befriending, 78–82, 209	befriending, 78–82, 209	дружба, 78–82, 209	befriending, 78–82, 209
Be With	Be With	Быть с	Be With
Activation Practice (exercise), 73	Activation Practice (exercise), 73	Практика активации (упражнение), 73	Activation Practice (exercise), 73
Be With Journaling Questions (exercise), 72–73	Be With Journaling Questions (exercise), 72–73	Будьте с вопросами для ведения дневника (упражнение), 72–73	Be With Journaling Questions (exercise), 72–73
blending, 66–67	blending, 66–67	смешивание, 66–67	blending, 66–67
Journal Capture (exercise), 72	Journal Capture (exercise), 72	Захват журнала (упражнение), 72	Journal Capture (exercise), 72
meditation, 12, 70–72	meditation, 12, 70–72	медитация, 12, 70–72	meditation, 12, 70–72
parts and separation from Self, overview, 65–66	parts and separation from Self, overview, 65–66	части и отделение от себя, обзор, 65–66.	parts and separation from Self, overview, 65–66
unblending, 67–70	unblending, 67–70	несмешение, 67–70	unblending, 67–70
Black families, loyalty and, 8	Black families, loyalty and, 8	Черные семьи, верность и, 8	Black families, loyalty and, 8
Black Therapists Rock (BTR), 2, 10–13	Black Therapists Rock (BTR), 2, 10–13	Черный терапевт-рок (BTR), 2, 10–13	Black Therapists Rock (BTR), 2, 10–13
Black women, IFS for, 4	Black women, IFS for, 4	Чернокожие женщины, IFS для, 4	Black women, IFS for, 4
Bland, Sandra, 158	Bland, Sandra, 158	Бланд, Сандра, 158 лет	Bland, Sandra, 158
blending	blending	смешивание	blending
defined, 66–67, 209	defined, 66–67, 209	определено, 66–67, 209	defined, 66–67, 209
preventing blending vs. unblending, 136	preventing blending vs. unblending, 136	предотвращение смешивания и размешивание, 136	preventing blending vs. unblending, 136
unblending, defined, 67–68	unblending, defined, 67–68	несмешивание, определенное, 67–68	unblending, defined, 67–68
unblending, difficulty of, 68–70	unblending, difficulty of, 68–70	размешивание, сложность, 68–70	unblending, difficulty of, 68–70
burdens, 147–167	burdens, 147–167	бремя, 147–167	burdens, 147–167
anxiety as legacy burden (case vignette), 151–153	anxiety as legacy burden (case vignette), 151–153	тревога как бремя наследия (пример случая), 151–153	anxiety as legacy burden (case vignette), 151–153
anxiety as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151	anxiety as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151	тревога как личное бремя (пример случая), 150–151	anxiety as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151
author’s experience of, 147–149	author’s experience of, 147–149	опыт автора, 147–149	author’s experience of, 147–149
Cabin with the Ancestor (meditation), 11–12, 13, 163–164	Cabin with the Ancestor (meditation), 11–12, 13, 163–164	Хижина с Предком (медитация), 11–12, 13, 163–164.	Cabin with the Ancestor (meditation), 11–12, 13, 163–164
cultural legacy burdens, 156–158	cultural legacy burdens, 156–158	бремя культурного наследия, 156–158	cultural legacy burdens, 156–158
defined, 149, 209	defined, 149, 209	определено, 149, 209	defined, 149, 209
development of, 153–155	development of, 153–155	развитие, 153–155	development of, 153–155
IFS Assumption about, 17	IFS Assumption about, 17	ИФС Успенский о, 17	IFS Assumption about, 17
Journal Capture (exercise), 165	Journal Capture (exercise), 165	Захват журнала (упражнение), 165	Journal Capture (exercise), 165
Meditation Journaling Questions (exercise), 165–166	Meditation Journaling Questions (exercise), 165–166	Вопросы по ведению дневника медитации (упражнение), 165–166	Meditation Journaling Questions (exercise), 165–166
personal vs. legacy burdens, 149–155	personal vs. legacy burdens, 149–155	Личное и наследственное бремя, 149–155	personal vs. legacy burdens, 149–155
Strong Black Woman legacy burden and gifts (case vignette), 158–162	Strong Black Woman legacy burden and gifts (case vignette), 158–162	Бремя наследия и дары сильной чернокожей женщины (пример из дела), 158–162	Strong Black Woman legacy burden and gifts (case vignette), 158–162
Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167	Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167	Понимание бремени наследия (упражнение), 166–167	Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167
vulnerability and, 39–40	vulnerability and, 39–40	уязвимость и, 39–40	vulnerability and, 39–40
C	C	С	C
Cabin with the Ancestor (meditation), 11–12, 13, 163–164. See also burdens	Cabin with the Ancestor (meditation), 11–12, 13, 163–164. See also burdens	Хижина с Предком (медитация), 11–12, 13, 163–164. См. также обременения	Cabin with the Ancestor (meditation), 11–12, 13, 163–164. See also burdens
Calm, 53, 109, 191. See also Self qualities	Calm, 53, 109, 191. See also Self qualities	Спокойствие, 53, 109, 191. См. также Самокачества.	Calm, 53, 109, 191. See also Self qualities
“Carefree” part experience, 23–25, 182	“Carefree” part experience, 23–25, 182	Опыт «Беззаботной» части, 23–25, 182	“Carefree” part experience, 23–25, 182
case vignettes. See individual topical entries	case vignettes. See individual topical entries	виньетки по делу. См. отдельные тематические записи	case vignettes. See individual topical entries
children. See vulnerability	children. See vulnerability	дети. Посмотреть уязвимость	children. See vulnerability
Clarity, 19, 54, 192. See also Self qualities	Clarity, 19, 54, 192. See also Self qualities	Ясность, 19, 54, 192. См. также Личностные качества.	Clarity, 19, 54, 192. See also Self qualities
Compassion, 53, 109, 191. See also Self qualities	Compassion, 53, 109, 191. See also Self qualities	Сострадание, 53, 109, 191. См. также Личностные качества.	Compassion, 53, 109, 191. See also Self qualities
Confidence, 54, 109, 192. See also Self qualities	Confidence, 54, 109, 192. See also Self qualities	Уверенность, 54, 109, 192. См. также Самокачества.	Confidence, 54, 109, 192. See also Self qualities
Connectedness	Connectedness	Связность	Connectedness
Connecting Inside (exercise), 35	Connecting Inside (exercise), 35	Соединение внутри (упражнение), 35	Connecting Inside (exercise), 35
Connecting Inside Journaling Questions (exercise), 34	Connecting Inside Journaling Questions (exercise), 34	Объединение вопросов внутреннего ведения журнала (упражнение), 34	Connecting Inside Journaling Questions (exercise), 34
Connecting Inside (meditation), 33	Connecting Inside (meditation), 33	Соединение внутри (медитация), 33	Connecting Inside (meditation), 33
eight Cs and, 53–54, 109–110, 192 (see also Self qualities)	eight Cs and, 53–54, 109–110, 192 (see also Self qualities)	восемь Cs и, 53–54, 109–110, 192 (см. также Самокачества)	eight Cs and, 53–54, 109–110, 192 (see also Self qualities)
Courage, 54–55, 110, 191. See also Self qualities	Courage, 54–55, 110, 191. See also Self qualities	Мужество, 54–55, 110, 191. См. также Личностные качества.	Courage, 54–55, 110, 191. See also Self qualities
Creativity, 54, 110, 191. See also Self qualities	Creativity, 54, 110, 191. See also Self qualities	Творчество, 54, 110, 191. См. также Самокачества.	Creativity, 54, 110, 191. See also Self qualities
“Cry Baby” part example, 37–38, 40, 184–185	“Cry Baby” part example, 37–38, 40, 184–185	Пример партии «Cry Baby», 37–38, 40, 184–185.	“Cry Baby” part example, 37–38, 40, 184–185
Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87. See also Self-to-part relationship	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87. See also Self-to-part relationship	Хрустальная пещера с предками (медитация), 85–87. См. также Отношения «я-часть».	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87. See also Self-to-part relationship
cultural burden	cultural burden	культурное бремя	cultural burden
defined, 156–158, 209	defined, 156–158, 209	определено, 156–158, 209	defined, 156–158, 209
four types of, 39	four types of, 39	четыре типа, 39	four types of, 39
Strong Black Woman legacy burden and gifts (case vignette), 158–162	Strong Black Woman legacy burden and gifts (case vignette), 158–162	Бремя наследия и дары сильной чернокожей женщины (пример из дела), 158–162	Strong Black Woman legacy burden and gifts (case vignette), 158–162
Curiosity, 53, 110, 122–124, 191. See also Self qualities	Curiosity, 53, 110, 122–124, 191. See also Self qualities	Любопытство, 53, 110, 122–124, 191. См. также Личностные качества.	Curiosity, 53, 110, 122–124, 191. See also Self qualities
D	D	Д	D
Deepening the Relationship (exercise), 88	Deepening the Relationship (exercise), 88	Углубление отношений (упражнение), 88	Deepening the Relationship (exercise), 88
Deepen the Connection (exercise), 47	Deepen the Connection (exercise), 47	Углубление связи (упражнение), 47	Deepen the Connection (exercise), 47
depression, protector parts and, 27–28. See also anxiety; suicidal thoughts	depression, protector parts and, 27–28. See also anxiety; suicidal thoughts	депрессия, протекторные части и, 27–28. См. также беспокойство; суицидальные мысли	depression, protector parts and, 27–28. See also anxiety; suicidal thoughts
Direct Access, 82–83, 209	Direct Access, 82–83, 209	Прямой доступ, 82–83, 209.	Direct Access, 82–83, 209
divorce	divorce	развод	divorce
Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188	Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188	Развод по частям (пример случая), 187–188	Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188
Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190	Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190	Самостоятельный развод (пример случая), 188–190	Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190
do-overs, 138–139, 209	do-overs, 138–139, 209	переделки, 138–139, 209	do-overs, 138–139, 209
Drawing the Polarized System (exercise), 103–104	Drawing the Polarized System (exercise), 103–104	Рисование поляризованной системы (упражнение), 103–104.	Drawing the Polarized System (exercise), 103–104
E	E	Э	E
eight Cs. See also Calm; Clarity; Compassion; Confidence; Connectedness; Courage; Creativity; Curiosity	eight Cs. See also Calm; Clarity; Compassion; Confidence; Connectedness; Courage; Creativity; Curiosity	восемь Cs. См. также Спокойствие; Ясность; Сострадание; Уверенность; Связность; Храбрость; Креативность; Любопытство	eight Cs. See also Calm; Clarity; Compassion; Confidence; Connectedness; Courage; Creativity; Curiosity
defined, 52–55 (see also Self-leadership; Self qualities)	defined, 52–55 (see also Self-leadership; Self qualities)	определены, 52–55 (см. также Самолидерство; Самокачества)	defined, 52–55 (see also Self-leadership; Self qualities)
exiles and building trust, 136–137	exiles and building trust, 136–137	изгнанники и строительство доверия, 136–137.	exiles and building trust, 136–137
Self and the body, 109–110	Self and the body, 109–110	Я и тело, 109–110.	Self and the body, 109–110
Elemental Healing (meditation), 144–146. See also unburdening	Elemental Healing (meditation), 144–146. See also unburdening	Элементальное исцеление (медитация), 144–146. См. также освобождение от бремени	Elemental Healing (meditation), 144–146. See also unburdening
empty nester (grief) case vignette, 57–60	empty nester (grief) case vignette, 57–60	виньетка с пустым гнездом (горем), 57–60	empty nester (grief) case vignette, 57–60
enslavement, cultural legacy burdens and, 156	enslavement, cultural legacy burdens and, 156	порабощение, бремя культурного наследия и, 156	enslavement, cultural legacy burdens and, 156
exercises	exercises	упражнения	exercises
Activation Practice, 73	Activation Practice, 73	Практика активации, 73	Activation Practice, 73
Be With Journaling Questions, 72–73	Be With Journaling Questions, 72–73	Будьте с вопросами для ведения дневника, 72–73	Be With Journaling Questions, 72–73
Connecting Inside, 35	Connecting Inside, 35	Соединяясь внутри, 35	Connecting Inside, 35
Connecting Inside Journaling Questions, 34	Connecting Inside Journaling Questions, 34	Объединение вопросов внутреннего ведения журнала, 34	Connecting Inside Journaling Questions, 34
Create a U-Turn Statement, 194	Create a U-Turn Statement, 194	Создайте заявление о развороте, 194	Create a U-Turn Statement, 194
Deepening the Relationship, 88	Deepening the Relationship, 88	Углубление отношений, 88	Deepening the Relationship, 88
Deepen the Connection, 47	Deepen the Connection, 47	Углубляйте связь, 47	Deepen the Connection, 47
Drawing the Polarized System, 103–104	Drawing the Polarized System, 103–104	Рисование поляризованной системы, 103–104.	Drawing the Polarized System, 103–104
Hope Merchant, 130–131	Hope Merchant, 130–131	Хоуп Торговец, 130–131.	Hope Merchant, 130–131
Journal about Wisdom of Your Body, 115	Journal about Wisdom of Your Body, 115	Журнал о мудрости вашего тела, 115	Journal about Wisdom of Your Body, 115
Journal Capture, 34, 46, 62, 72, 88, 102, 115, 129, 146, 165, 179, 193	Journal Capture, 34, 46, 62, 72, 88, 102, 115, 129, 146, 165, 179, 193	Захват журнала, 34, 46, 62, 72, 88, 102, 115, 129, 146, 165, 179, 193	Journal Capture, 34, 46, 62, 72, 88, 102, 115, 129, 146, 165, 179, 193
Journal Prompts, 46–47, 88, 102–103, 146, 179, 193–194	Journal Prompts, 46–47, 88, 102–103, 146, 179, 193–194	Подсказки журнала, 46–47, 88, 102–103, 146, 179, 193–194.	Journal Prompts, 46–47, 88, 102–103, 146, 179, 193–194
Meditation Journaling Questions, 165–166	Meditation Journaling Questions, 165–166	Вопросы по ведению дневника медитации, 165–166	Meditation Journaling Questions, 165–166
Naming the Sensations, 116	Naming the Sensations, 116	Называя ощущения, 116	Naming the Sensations, 116
Self Qualities Journal Questions, 62	Self Qualities Journal Questions, 62	Вопросы журнала «Самооценка», 62	Self Qualities Journal Questions, 62
Self Qualities Practice & Awareness, 63	Self Qualities Practice & Awareness, 63	Практика и осознание собственных качеств, 63	Self Qualities Practice & Awareness, 63
30 Day Parts Check-In, 179–180	30 Day Parts Check-In, 179–180	30-дневная проверка запчастей, 179–180	30 Day Parts Check-In, 179–180
Understanding Legacy Burden, 166–167	Understanding Legacy Burden, 166–167	Понимание бремени наследия, 166–167	Understanding Legacy Burden, 166–167
The Weary One Journaling Questions, 130	The Weary One Journaling Questions, 130	Вопросы для дневника «Усталый», 130	The Weary One Journaling Questions, 130
Where Parts Live in Your Body, 116	Where Parts Live in Your Body, 116	Где в вашем теле живут части, 116	Where Parts Live in Your Body, 116
exhausted parts, 117–131	exhausted parts, 117–131	изношенные части, 117–131	exhausted parts, 117–131
author’s experience, 117–119, 122–128	author’s experience, 117–119, 122–128	опыт автора, 117–119, 122–128	author’s experience, 117–119, 122–128
Hope Merchant, overview, 119–122	Hope Merchant, overview, 119–122	Надежда Купец, обзор, 119–122.	Hope Merchant, overview, 119–122
Hope Merchant (exercise), 130–131	Hope Merchant (exercise), 130–131	Торговец надеждой (упражнение), 130–131	Hope Merchant (exercise), 130–131
Journal Capture (exercise), 129	Journal Capture (exercise), 129	Захват журнала (упражнение), 129	Journal Capture (exercise), 129
The Weary One Journaling Questions (exercise), 130	The Weary One Journaling Questions (exercise), 130	Вопросы для ведения журнала «Усталый» (упражнение), 130	The Weary One Journaling Questions (exercise), 130
The Weary One (meditation), 128–129	The Weary One (meditation), 128–129	Усталый (медитация), 128–129.	The Weary One (meditation), 128–129
exiles	exiles	изгнанники	exiles
burdens of, 153–155	burdens of, 153–155	бремя, 153–155	burdens of, 153–155
case vignette, 41–44	case vignette, 41–44	виньетка по делу, 41–44	case vignette, 41–44
defined, 209	defined, 209	определено, 209	defined, 209
healing (see unburdening)	healing (see unburdening)	исцеление (см. освобождение)	healing (see unburdening)
integration of, 171–172 (see also integration)	integration of, 171–172 (see also integration)	интеграция, 171–172 (см. также интеграцию)	integration of, 171–172 (see also integration)
polarization of, 91–92	polarization of, 91–92	поляризация, 91–92	polarization of, 91–92
retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144	retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144	возвращение изгнанника (сценарий дела), 142–144	retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144
trauma in the body and, 108	trauma in the body and, 108	травма тела и, 108	trauma in the body and, 108
unburdened, 177	unburdened, 177	без бремени, 177	unburdened, 177
vulnerability and, 38–39	vulnerability and, 38–39	уязвимость и, 38–39	vulnerability and, 38–39
F	F	Ф	F
family loyalty, 8	family loyalty, 8	семейная верность, 8	family loyalty, 8
fears, defined, 209	fears, defined, 209	страхи, определены, 209	fears, defined, 209
feel toward (going inside), 28, 209, 210	feel toward (going inside), 28, 209, 210	чувствовать себя (входить внутрь), 28, 209, 210	feel toward (going inside), 28, 209, 210
find (going inside), 28, 209	find (going inside), 28, 209	найти (зайдя внутрь), 28, 209	find (going inside), 28, 209
firefighters	firefighters	пожарные	firefighters
burdens of, 153–155	burdens of, 153–155	бремя, 153–155	burdens of, 153–155
defined, 27, 209	defined, 27, 209	определено, 27, 209	defined, 27, 209
firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32	firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32	Намерение пожарных и воздействие, 31–32	firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32
protector role of, 107–109	protector role of, 107–109	роль защитника, 107–109	protector role of, 107–109
Raging Firefighter (case vignette), 29–31	Raging Firefighter (case vignette), 29–31	Бешеный пожарный (пример случая), 29–31	Raging Firefighter (case vignette), 29–31
as reactive protectors, 120	as reactive protectors, 120	в качестве реактивных протекторов, 120	as reactive protectors, 120
unburdened, 177	unburdened, 177	без бремени, 177	unburdened, 177
fleshing out, 82, 209	fleshing out, 82, 209	конкретизация, 82, 209	fleshing out, 82, 209
flow state, 54, 110	flow state, 54, 110	состояние потока, 54, 110	flow state, 54, 110
Floyd, Tamala	Floyd, Tamala	Флойд, Тамала	Floyd, Tamala
ancestral healing of, personal experience, 2–4	ancestral healing of, personal experience, 2–4	наследственное исцеление, личный опыт, 2–4	ancestral healing of, personal experience, 2–4
“Antsy” part experience of, 65–66, 75–78, 80–81, 182	“Antsy” part experience of, 65–66, 75–78, 80–81, 182	Опыт партии «Анти», 65–66, 75–78, 80–81, 182	“Antsy” part experience of, 65–66, 75–78, 80–81, 182
“Carefree” part experience of, 23–25, 182	“Carefree” part experience of, 23–25, 182	Опыт «Беззаботной» части, 23–25, 182	“Carefree” part experience of, 23–25, 182
“Cry Baby” part experience of, 37–38, 40, 184–185	“Cry Baby” part experience of, 37–38, 40, 184–185	Опыт части «Cry Baby», 37–38, 40, 184–185.	“Cry Baby” part experience of, 37–38, 40, 184–185
as first Black IFS solo lead trainer, 76, 81, 91, 196–197	as first Black IFS solo lead trainer, 76, 81, 91, 196–197	в качестве первого ведущего тренера Black IFS, 76, 81, 91, 196–197.	as first Black IFS solo lead trainer, 76, 81, 91, 196–197
Listening When Parts Speak, objectives of, 18–20	Listening When Parts Speak, objectives of, 18–20	Слушать, когда говорят части, цели, 18–20	Listening When Parts Speak, objectives of, 18–20
personal experiences of (see individual topical entries)	personal experiences of (see individual topical entries)	личный опыт (см. отдельные тематические статьи)	personal experiences of (see individual topical entries)
“Pricklee” part example of, 117–119, 122–128, 133–135, 169–170, 183	“Pricklee” part example of, 117–119, 122–128, 133–135, 169–170, 183	Пример части «Колючки», 117–119, 122–128, 133–135, 169–170, 183.	“Pricklee” part example of, 117–119, 122–128, 133–135, 169–170, 183
“Shhhh” part example, 169–170, 183	“Shhhh” part example, 169–170, 183	Пример партии «Шшшш», 169–170, 183	“Shhhh” part example, 169–170, 183
“Survive” and “Thrive” parts experience of, 89–91, 93, 184	“Survive” and “Thrive” parts experience of, 89–91, 93, 184	Опыт частей «Выжить» и «Процветать», 89–91, 93, 184.	“Survive” and “Thrive” parts experience of, 89–91, 93, 184
Writing Clan of ancestors of, 12, 201	Writing Clan of ancestors of, 12, 201	Написание Рода Предков, 12, 201 г.	Writing Clan of ancestors of, 12, 201
focus (going inside), 28, 210	focus (going inside), 28, 210	фокус (иду внутрь), 28, 210	focus (going inside), 28, 210
Foor, Daniel, 6	Foor, Daniel, 6	Фур, Дэниел, 6 лет	Foor, Daniel, 6
G	G	Г	G
Garner, Eric, 158	Garner, Eric, 158	Гарнер, Эрик, 158 лет.	Garner, Eric, 158
Go Along to Get Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186	Go Along to Get Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186	Идите, чтобы ладить против Бульдога (пример из дела), 95–99, 185–186	Go Along to Get Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186
going inside, 28, 210. See also parts, connecting inside	going inside, 28, 210. See also parts, connecting inside	вход внутрь, 28, 210. См. также детали, соединяющие внутри	going inside, 28, 210. See also parts, connecting inside
Golden, Marita, 157	Golden, Marita, 157	Голден, Марита, 157	Golden, Marita, 157
grief case vignette, 57–60	grief case vignette, 57–60	эпизод из случая горя, 57–60	grief case vignette, 57–60
H	H	ЧАС	H
Harris, Keoshia, 156	Harris, Keoshia, 156	Харрис, Кеошия, 156 лет.	Harris, Keoshia, 156
Hay House, 14–15, 76	Hay House, 14–15, 76	Хэй Хаус, 14–15, 76	Hay House, 14–15, 76
Hope Merchant	Hope Merchant	Надежда Торговец	Hope Merchant
for exhausted parts, 119–122	for exhausted parts, 119–122	для изношенных деталей — 119–122.	for exhausted parts, 119–122
practice (exercise), 130–131	practice (exercise), 130–131	практика (упражнение), 130–131	practice (exercise), 130–131
I	I	я	I
IFS. See Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy	IFS. See Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy	ИФС. См. Терапию внутренних семейных систем (IFS).	IFS. See Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy
individualism, as cultural burden, 40, 156	individualism, as cultural burden, 40, 156	индивидуализм, как культурное бремя, 40, 156	individualism, as cultural burden, 40, 156
In-Sight, 82–83, 210	In-Sight, 82–83, 210	Ин-Сайт, 82–83, 210	In-Sight, 82–83, 210
integration, 169–180	integration, 169–180	интеграция, 169–180	integration, 169–180
author’s experience of, 169–170	author’s experience of, 169–170	опыт автора, 169–170	author’s experience of, 169–170
defined, 171–172, 210	defined, 171–172, 210	определено, 171–172, 210	defined, 171–172, 210
intention and, 172–173	intention and, 172–173	намерение и, 172–173	intention and, 172–173
Journal Capture (exercise), 179	Journal Capture (exercise), 179	Захват журнала (упражнение), 179	Journal Capture (exercise), 179
Journal Prompts (exercise), 179	Journal Prompts (exercise), 179	Журнальные подсказки (упражнение), 179	Journal Prompts (exercise), 179
The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177	The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177	Ребенок на замену (пример случая), 174–177.	The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177
30 Day Parts Check-In (exercise), 179–180	30 Day Parts Check-In (exercise), 179–180	30-дневная проверка запчастей (упражнение), 179–180	30 Day Parts Check-In (exercise), 179–180
Trailblazer (meditation), 12, 178–179	Trailblazer (meditation), 12, 178–179	Первопроходец (медитация), 12, 178–179.	Trailblazer (meditation), 12, 178–179
updating and, 173	updating and, 173	обновление и, 173	updating and, 173
intention	intention	намерение	intention
defined, 172–173, 210	defined, 172–173, 210	определено, 172–173, 210	defined, 172–173, 210
firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32	firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32	Намерение пожарных и воздействие, 31–32	firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32
IFS Assumption about, 17	IFS Assumption about, 17	ИФС Успенский о, 17	IFS Assumption about, 17
Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy. See also parts	Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy. See also parts	Терапия внутренних семейных систем (IFS). См. также части	Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy. See also parts
Assumptions of, 16–18	Assumptions of, 16–18	Предположения, 16–18	Assumptions of, 16–18
author’s experience with, 2–4	author’s experience with, 2–4	опыт автора, 2–4	author’s experience with, 2–4
benefits of, 199–200	benefits of, 199–200	преимущества, 199–200	benefits of, 199–200
defined, 5, 210	defined, 5, 210	определено, 5, 210	defined, 5, 210
goals of, 186–187, 198–199	goals of, 186–187, 198–199	голы, 186–187, 198–199	goals of, 186–187, 198–199
going inside (find, focus, feel toward), 28, 209, 210	going inside (find, focus, feel toward), 28, 209, 210	войти внутрь (найти, сфокусироваться, почувствовать), 28, 209, 210	going inside (find, focus, feel toward), 28, 209, 210
learning about, 18–20	learning about, 18–20	узнать о, 18–20	learning about, 18–20
protective nature of parts, 25–28	protective nature of parts, 25–28	защитная природа частей, 25–28	protective nature of parts, 25–28
Schwartz on, 5–6, 16–18	Schwartz on, 5–6, 16–18	Шварц дальше, 5–6, 16–18	Schwartz on, 5–6, 16–18
Self-leadership for, in conjunction with therapy, 21	Self-leadership for, in conjunction with therapy, 21	Самолидерство в сочетании с терапией 21	Self-leadership for, in conjunction with therapy, 21
Self-leadership for, independent of therapy, 20–21	Self-leadership for, independent of therapy, 20–21	Самолидерство, независимо от терапии, 20–21	Self-leadership for, independent of therapy, 20–21
for therapists and practitioners, 21–22	for therapists and practitioners, 21–22	для терапевтов и практикующих врачей, 21–22	for therapists and practitioners, 21–22
Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition (Schwartz), 106, 156	Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition (Schwartz), 106, 156	Внутренняя семейная системная терапия, второе издание (Шварц), 106, 156.	Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition (Schwartz), 106, 156
intuition, 142	intuition, 142	интуиция, 142	intuition, 142
invitation, 141–142, 210	invitation, 141–142, 210	приглашение, 141–142, 210	invitation, 141–142, 210
J	J	Дж	J
Jones, Martinque, 156	Jones, Martinque, 156	Джонс, Мартинка, 156 лет	Jones, Martinque, 156
journaling. See also exercises	journaling. See also exercises	ведение дневника. Смотрите также упражнения	journaling. See also exercises
Be With Journaling Questions, 72–73	Be With Journaling Questions, 72–73	Будьте с вопросами для ведения дневника, 72–73	Be With Journaling Questions, 72–73
Connecting Inside Journaling Questions, 34	Connecting Inside Journaling Questions, 34	Объединение вопросов внутреннего ведения журнала, 34	Connecting Inside Journaling Questions, 34
Journal about Wisdom of Your Body, 115	Journal about Wisdom of Your Body, 115	Журнал о мудрости вашего тела, 115	Journal about Wisdom of Your Body, 115
Journal Capture, 34, 46, 62, 72, 88, 102, 115, 129, 146, 165, 179, 193	Journal Capture, 34, 46, 62, 72, 88, 102, 115, 129, 146, 165, 179, 193	Захват журнала, 34, 46, 62, 72, 88, 102, 115, 129, 146, 165, 179, 193	Journal Capture, 34, 46, 62, 72, 88, 102, 115, 129, 146, 165, 179, 193
Journal Prompts, 46–47, 88, 102–103, 146, 179, 193–194	Journal Prompts, 46–47, 88, 102–103, 146, 179, 193–194	Подсказки журнала, 46–47, 88, 102–103, 146, 179, 193–194.	Journal Prompts, 46–47, 88, 102–103, 146, 179, 193–194
Meditation Journaling Questions, 165–166	Meditation Journaling Questions, 165–166	Вопросы по ведению дневника медитации, 165–166	Meditation Journaling Questions, 165–166
Self Qualities Journal Questions, 62	Self Qualities Journal Questions, 62	Вопросы журнала «Самооценка», 62	Self Qualities Journal Questions, 62
The Weary One Journaling Questions, 130	The Weary One Journaling Questions, 130	Вопросы для дневника «Усталый», 130	The Weary One Journaling Questions, 130
K	K	К	K
Krause, Pamela, 121	Krause, Pamela, 121	Краузе, Памела, 121	Krause, Pamela, 121
L	L	л	L
Labyrinth with the Ancestor (meditation), 12, 190–193. See also Self-leadership	Labyrinth with the Ancestor (meditation), 12, 190–193. See also Self-leadership	Лабиринт с Предком (медитация), 12, 190–193. См. также Самолидерство.	Labyrinth with the Ancestor (meditation), 12, 190–193. See also Self-leadership
legacy burdens. See also burdens	legacy burdens. See also burdens	бремя наследия. См. также обременения	legacy burdens. See also burdens
cultural burdens vs., 40	cultural burdens vs., 40	культурное бремя против, 40	cultural burdens vs., 40
defined, 210	defined, 210	определено, 210	defined, 210
IFS through legacy burden work, 7	IFS through legacy burden work, 7	IFS через работу с устаревшими бременами, 7	IFS through legacy burden work, 7
personal burdens vs., 149–155	personal burdens vs., 149–155	личное бремя против, 149–155	personal burdens vs., 149–155
Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167	Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167	Понимание бремени наследия (упражнение), 166–167	Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167
legacy (intergenerational) gifts, 3, 9, 210. See also ancestors	legacy (intergenerational) gifts, 3, 9, 210. See also ancestors	дары наследия (из поколения в поколение), 3, 9, 210. См. также предков.	legacy (intergenerational) gifts, 3, 9, 210. See also ancestors
listening, 195–201. See also ancestors; Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy; parts; Self	listening, 195–201. See also ancestors; Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy; parts; Self	слушаю, 195–201. См. также предки; Терапия внутренних семейных систем (IFS); части; Себя	listening, 195–201. See also ancestors; Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy; parts; Self
author’s experience, 195–197	author’s experience, 195–197	опыт автора, 195–197	author’s experience, 195–197
as journey, 197–198, 201	as journey, 197–198, 201	как путешествие, 197–198, 201	as journey, 197–198, 201
parts work benefits, 199–200	parts work benefits, 199–200	Пособия по запчастям, 199–200	parts work benefits, 199–200
parts work goals, 198–199	parts work goals, 198–199	цели работы по частям, 198–199	parts work goals, 198–199
Listening When Parts Speak (Floyd), objectives of, 18–20	Listening When Parts Speak (Floyd), objectives of, 18–20	Слушать, когда говорят части (Флойд), цели, 18–20	Listening When Parts Speak (Floyd), objectives of, 18–20
M	M	М	M
managers	managers	менеджеры	managers
burdens of, 153–155	burdens of, 153–155	бремя, 153–155	burdens of, 153–155
defined, 26, 210	defined, 26, 210	определено, 26, 210	defined, 26, 210
as proactive protectors, 107–109, 120	as proactive protectors, 107–109, 120	как активные защитники, 107–109, 120	as proactive protectors, 107–109, 120
Self-like parts, 55–56, 211	Self-like parts, 55–56, 211	Самоподобные части, 55–56, 211.	Self-like parts, 55–56, 211
unburdened, 177	unburdened, 177	без бремени, 177	unburdened, 177
Martin, Trayvon, 158	Martin, Trayvon, 158	Мартин, Трейвон, 158 лет	Martin, Trayvon, 158
materialism, as cultural burden, 40, 156	materialism, as cultural burden, 40, 156	материализм, как культурное бремя, 40, 156	materialism, as cultural burden, 40, 156
The Meadow (meditation), 45–46. See also vulnerability	The Meadow (meditation), 45–46. See also vulnerability	Луг (медитация), 45–46. См. также уязвимость	The Meadow (meditation), 45–46. See also vulnerability
meditations	meditations	медитации	meditations
for ancestral lineage healing, 6, 10–13	for ancestral lineage healing, 6, 10–13	для исцеления родословной, 6, 10–13	for ancestral lineage healing, 6, 10–13
Be With, 12, 70–72	Be With, 12, 70–72	Будь с, 12, 70–72	Be With, 12, 70–72
Cabin with the Ancestor, 11–12, 13, 163–164	Cabin with the Ancestor, 11–12, 13, 163–164	Хижина с Предком, 11–12, 13, 163–164.	Cabin with the Ancestor, 11–12, 13, 163–164
Connecting Inside, 33	Connecting Inside, 33	Соединяясь внутри, 33	Connecting Inside, 33
Crystal Cave with the Ancestors, 85–87	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors, 85–87	Хрустальная пещера с предками, 85–87 гг.	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors, 85–87
Elemental Healing, 144–146	Elemental Healing, 144–146	Элементальное исцеление, 144–146.	Elemental Healing, 144–146
Labyrinth with the Ancestor, 12, 190–193	Labyrinth with the Ancestor, 12, 190–193	Лабиринт с Предком, 12, 190–193.	Labyrinth with the Ancestor, 12, 190–193
The Meadow, 45–46	The Meadow, 45–46	Луговая, 45–46.	The Meadow, 45–46
Meditation Journaling Questions (exercise), 165–166	Meditation Journaling Questions (exercise), 165–166	Вопросы по ведению дневника медитации (упражнение), 165–166	Meditation Journaling Questions (exercise), 165–166
Polarization Picnic, 100–102	Polarization Picnic, 100–102	Поляризационный пикник, 100–102	Polarization Picnic, 100–102
Self Qualities (meditation), 12, 61–62	Self Qualities (meditation), 12, 61–62	Самокачества (медитация), 12, 61–62.	Self Qualities (meditation), 12, 61–62
Trailblazer, 12, 178–179	Trailblazer, 12, 178–179	Первопроходец, 12, 178–179.	Trailblazer, 12, 178–179
Waterfall, 113–114	Waterfall, 113–114	Водопад, 113–114	Waterfall, 113–114
The Weary One, 128–129	The Weary One, 128–129	Утомленный, 128–129.	The Weary One, 128–129
The Mindbody Prescription (Sarno), 105	The Mindbody Prescription (Sarno), 105	Рецепт тела разума (Сарно), 105	The Mindbody Prescription (Sarno), 105
The Mindbody Workbook (Schechter), 105	The Mindbody Workbook (Schechter), 105	Рабочая тетрадь Mindbody (Шехтер), 105.	The Mindbody Workbook (Schechter), 105
N	N	Н	N
Naming the Sensations (exercise), 116	Naming the Sensations (exercise), 116	Называя ощущения (упражнение), 116	Naming the Sensations (exercise), 116
Native Americans, cultural legacy burdens and, 156	Native Americans, cultural legacy burdens and, 156	Коренные американцы, бремя культурного наследия и, 156	Native Americans, cultural legacy burdens and, 156
nausea (case vignette), 110–112	nausea (case vignette), 110–112	тошнота (пример случая), 110–112	nausea (case vignette), 110–112
P	P	П	P
panic attack example, 65–66	panic attack example, 65–66	пример панической атаки, 65–66	panic attack example, 65–66
parts. See also exiles; firefighters; managers; protector parts; Self-to-part relationship	parts. See also exiles; firefighters; managers; protector parts; Self-to-part relationship	части. См. также изгнанников; пожарные; менеджеры; детали протектора; Отношения между собой и частью	parts. See also exiles; firefighters; managers; protector parts; Self-to-part relationship
defined, 5–6, 210	defined, 5–6, 210	определено, 5–6, 210	defined, 5–6, 210
exhaustion of, 117–131 (see also exhausted parts)	exhaustion of, 117–131 (see also exhausted parts)	истощение, 117–131 (см. также исчерпанные части)	exhaustion of, 117–131 (see also exhausted parts)
IFS Assumptions about, 16–17, 18	IFS Assumptions about, 16–17, 18	Предположения IFS о, 16–17, 18	IFS Assumptions about, 16–17, 18
listening to, as journey, 197–198, 201	listening to, as journey, 197–198, 201	слушаю, как путешествие, 197–198, 201	listening to, as journey, 197–198, 201
with opposing views, 89–104 (see also polarization)	with opposing views, 89–104 (see also polarization)	с противоположными взглядами, 89–104 (см. также поляризацию)	with opposing views, 89–104 (see also polarization)
Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188	Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188	Развод по частям (пример случая), 187–188	Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188
protector parts, defined, 210	protector parts, defined, 210	Детали протектора, определенные, 210	protector parts, defined, 210
Schwartz on, 5	Schwartz on, 5	Шварца на, 5	Schwartz on, 5
separation from Self, 65–73 (see also Self)	separation from Self, 65–73 (see also Self)	отделение от себя, 65–73 (см. также «Я»)	separation from Self, 65–73 (see also Self)
symptoms created by, 106–107	symptoms created by, 106–107	симптомы, созданные, 106–107	symptoms created by, 106–107
unburdened, 177	unburdened, 177	без бремени, 177	unburdened, 177
young and vulnerable parts, 37–47 (see also vulnerability)	young and vulnerable parts, 37–47 (see also vulnerability)	молодые и уязвимые части, 37–47 (см. также уязвимость)	young and vulnerable parts, 37–47 (see also vulnerability)
parts, connecting inside, 23–35	parts, connecting inside, 23–35	детали, соединяющиеся внутри, 23–35	parts, connecting inside, 23–35
author’s experience, 23–25	author’s experience, 23–25	опыт автора, 23–25	author’s experience, 23–25
Connecting Inside (exercise), 35	Connecting Inside (exercise), 35	Соединение внутри (упражнение), 35	Connecting Inside (exercise), 35
Connecting Inside Journaling Questions (exercise), 34	Connecting Inside Journaling Questions (exercise), 34	Объединение вопросов внутреннего ведения журнала (упражнение), 34	Connecting Inside Journaling Questions (exercise), 34
Connecting Inside (meditation), 33	Connecting Inside (meditation), 33	Соединение внутри (медитация), 33	Connecting Inside (meditation), 33
firefighter (case vignette), 29–31	firefighter (case vignette), 29–31	пожарный (пример случая), 29–31	firefighter (case vignette), 29–31
firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32	firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32	Намерение пожарных и воздействие, 31–32	firefighters’ intent vs. impact, 31–32
going inside (find, focus, feel toward), 28, 209, 210	going inside (find, focus, feel toward), 28, 209, 210	войти внутрь (найти, сфокусироваться, почувствовать), 28, 209, 210	going inside (find, focus, feel toward), 28, 209, 210
Journal Capture (exercise), 34	Journal Capture (exercise), 34	Захват журнала (упражнение), 34	Journal Capture (exercise), 34
protective nature of parts, 25–28	protective nature of parts, 25–28	защитная природа частей, 25–28	protective nature of parts, 25–28
patriarchy, as cultural burden, 40, 156	patriarchy, as cultural burden, 40, 156	патриархат, как культурное бремя, 40, 156	patriarchy, as cultural burden, 40, 156
perfectionism, 4, 27, 147–149, 182	perfectionism, 4, 27, 147–149, 182	перфекционизм, 4, 27, 147–149, 182	perfectionism, 4, 27, 147–149, 182
personal burdens. See also unburdening	personal burdens. See also unburdening	личные нагрузки. См. также освобождение от бремени	personal burdens. See also unburdening
anxiety as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151	anxiety as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151	тревога как личное бремя (пример случая), 150–151	anxiety as personal burden (case vignette), 150–151
defined, 39, 150, 210	defined, 39, 150, 210	определено, 39, 150, 210	defined, 39, 150, 210
legacy burdens vs., 149–155	legacy burdens vs., 149–155	бремя наследия против, 149–155	legacy burdens vs., 149–155
polarization, 89–104	polarization, 89–104	поляризация, 89–104	polarization, 89–104
author’s experience of, 89–91, 93, 184	author’s experience of, 89–91, 93, 184	опыт автора, 89–91, 93, 184	author’s experience of, 89–91, 93, 184
defined, 91–92, 210	defined, 91–92, 210	определено, 91–92, 210	defined, 91–92, 210
Drawing the Polarized System (exercise), 103–104	Drawing the Polarized System (exercise), 103–104	Рисование поляризованной системы (упражнение), 103–104.	Drawing the Polarized System (exercise), 103–104
Go-Along-to-Get-Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186	Go-Along-to-Get-Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186	Идти-ладить-ладить против Бульдога (пример случая), 95–99, 185–186	Go-Along-to-Get-Along vs. Bulldog (case vignette), 95–99, 185–186
Journal Capture (exercise), 102	Journal Capture (exercise), 102	Захват журнала (упражнение), 102	Journal Capture (exercise), 102
Journal Prompts (exercise), 102–103	Journal Prompts (exercise), 102–103	Подсказки к журналу (упражнение), 102–103.	Journal Prompts (exercise), 102–103
parts with opposing views, overview, 89–91	parts with opposing views, overview, 89–91	части с противоположными взглядами, обзор, 89–91.	parts with opposing views, overview, 89–91
Polarization Picnic (meditation), 100–102	Polarization Picnic (meditation), 100–102	Поляризационный пикник (медитация), 100–102	Polarization Picnic (meditation), 100–102
trauma in the body and, 108–109	trauma in the body and, 108–109	травмы тела и, 108–109	trauma in the body and, 108–109
working with polarized parts, 92–95	working with polarized parts, 92–95	работа с поляризованными частями, 92–95	working with polarized parts, 92–95
“Pricklee” part example, 117–119, 122–128, 133–135, 169–170, 183	“Pricklee” part example, 117–119, 122–128, 133–135, 169–170, 183	Пример партии «Колючки», 117–119, 122–128, 133–135, 169–170, 183.	“Pricklee” part example, 117–119, 122–128, 133–135, 169–170, 183
protector parts	protector parts	части протектора	protector parts
defined, 25–28, 210	defined, 25–28, 210	определено, 25–28, 210	defined, 25–28, 210
polarization of, 91–92	polarization of, 91–92	поляризация, 91–92	polarization of, 91–92
trauma in the body and, 106–107	trauma in the body and, 106–107	травмы тела и, 106–107	trauma in the body and, 106–107
unburdened, 177	unburdened, 177	без бремени, 177	unburdened, 177
R	R	Р	R
racism, as cultural burden, 40, 156	racism, as cultural burden, 40, 156	расизм как культурное бремя, 40, 156	racism, as cultural burden, 40, 156
“Ragdoll” (retrieving an exile case vignette), 142–144	“Ragdoll” (retrieving an exile case vignette), 142–144	«Рэгдолл» (извлечение эпизода из дела об изгнании), 142–144.	“Ragdoll” (retrieving an exile case vignette), 142–144
rejection, 195–197	rejection, 195–197	отказ, 195–197	rejection, 195–197
reparenting, exiling and, 41	reparenting, exiling and, 41	перевоспитание, изгнание и, 41	reparenting, exiling and, 41
The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177	The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177	Ребенок на замену (пример случая), 174–177.	The Replacement Child (case vignette), 174–177
retrieval by Self, 139–140, 210	retrieval by Self, 139–140, 210	поиск Селфом, 139–140, 210	retrieval by Self, 139–140, 210
Reynolds, Akilah, 156	Reynolds, Akilah, 156	Рейнольдс, Акила, 156 лет.	Reynolds, Akilah, 156
Ryder, Gina, 16	Ryder, Gina, 16	Райдер, Джина, 16 лет.	Ryder, Gina, 16
S	S	С	S
Sarno, John, 105	Sarno, John, 105	Сарно, Джон, 105 лет	Sarno, John, 105
Schechter, David, 105	Schechter, David, 105	Шехтер, Дэвид, 105 лет	Schechter, David, 105
Schwartz, Richard	Schwartz, Richard	Шварц, Ричард	Schwartz, Richard
on eight Cs, 52	on eight Cs, 52	на восьми Cs, 52	on eight Cs, 52
on firefighters, 107	on firefighters, 107	о пожарных, 107	on firefighters, 107
IFS Assumptions, 16–18	IFS Assumptions, 16–18	Допущения IFS, 16–18	IFS Assumptions, 16–18
IFS developed by, 5–6	IFS developed by, 5–6	IFS разработан, 5–6	IFS developed by, 5–6
on IFS therapy goal, 186–187	on IFS therapy goal, 186–187	о цели терапии IFS, 186–187	on IFS therapy goal, 186–187
Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition, 106, 156	Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition, 106, 156	Внутренняя семейная системная терапия, второе издание, 106, 156	Internal Family Systems Therapy, Second Edition, 106, 156
Self. See also exhausted parts; Self-leadership	Self. See also exhausted parts; Self-leadership	Себя. См. также изношенные детали; Самолидерство	Self. See also exhausted parts; Self-leadership
defined, 5, 52, 211	defined, 5, 52, 211	определено, 5, 52, 211	defined, 5, 52, 211
denying, to please others, 23–25	denying, to please others, 23–25	отрицание, чтобы угодить другим, 23–25	denying, to please others, 23–25
IFS Assumption about, 17	IFS Assumption about, 17	ИФС Успенский о, 17	IFS Assumption about, 17
parts and separation from, 65–73	parts and separation from, 65–73	части и отделение от, 65–73	parts and separation from, 65–73
retrieval by, 139–140, 210	retrieval by, 139–140, 210	поиск, 139–140, 210	retrieval by, 139–140, 210
trauma in the body and, 109–110	trauma in the body and, 109–110	травмы тела и, 109–110	trauma in the body and, 109–110
witnessing and, 40–41	witnessing and, 40–41	свидетельствование и, 40–41	witnessing and, 40–41
Self-energy	Self-energy	Собственная энергия	Self-energy
ancestors and access to Self, 56	ancestors and access to Self, 56	предки и доступ к себе, 56	ancestors and access to Self, 56
blending and access to, 66–67	blending and access to, 66–67	смешение и доступ к, 66–67	blending and access to, 66–67
Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87	Хрустальная пещера с предками (медитация), 85–87.	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87
exiles and building trust, 136–137	exiles and building trust, 136–137	изгнанники и строительство доверия, 136–137.	exiles and building trust, 136–137
reparenting and, 41	reparenting and, 41	перевоспитание и, 41	reparenting and, 41
Self-to-part relationship and, 81	Self-to-part relationship and, 81	Отношения между собой и, 81	Self-to-part relationship and, 81
Self-leadership, 181–194	Self-leadership, 181–194	Саморуководство, 181–194.	Self-leadership, 181–194
author’s experience, 181–186	author’s experience, 181–186	опыт автора, 181–186	author’s experience, 181–186
in conjunction with therapy, 21–22	in conjunction with therapy, 21–22	в сочетании с терапией, 21–22	in conjunction with therapy, 21–22
Create a U-Turn Statement (exercise), 194	Create a U-Turn Statement (exercise), 194	Создайте заявление о развороте (упражнение), 194	Create a U-Turn Statement (exercise), 194
defined, 5, 186–187, 211	defined, 5, 186–187, 211	определено, 5, 186–187, 211	defined, 5, 186–187, 211
exiles and building trust, 137	exiles and building trust, 137	ссыльные и строительство доверия, 137	exiles and building trust, 137
external circumstances and, 185–186	external circumstances and, 185–186	внешние обстоятельства и, 185–186	external circumstances and, 185–186
independent of therapy, 20–21	independent of therapy, 20–21	независимо от терапии, 20–21	independent of therapy, 20–21
Journal Capture (exercise), 193	Journal Capture (exercise), 193	Захват журнала (упражнение), 193	Journal Capture (exercise), 193
Journal Prompts (exercise), 193–194	Journal Prompts (exercise), 193–194	Журнальные подсказки (упражнение), 193–194.	Journal Prompts (exercise), 193–194
Labyrinth with the Ancestor (meditation), 12, 190–193	Labyrinth with the Ancestor (meditation), 12, 190–193	Лабиринт с Предком (медитация), 12, 190–193.	Labyrinth with the Ancestor (meditation), 12, 190–193
Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188	Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188	Развод по частям (пример случая), 187–188	Parts-led divorce (case vignette), 187–188
Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190	Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190	Самостоятельный развод (пример случая), 188–190	Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190
Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190	Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190	Самостоятельный развод (пример случая), 188–190	Self-led divorce (case vignette), 188–190
Self-like parts, 55–56, 211. See also managers	Self-like parts, 55–56, 211. See also managers	Самоподобные части, 55–56, 211. См. также менеджеров.	Self-like parts, 55–56, 211. See also managers
Self qualities, 49–63	Self qualities, 49–63	Личностные качества, 49–63.	Self qualities, 49–63
ancestors and access to Self, 56	ancestors and access to Self, 56	предки и доступ к себе, 56	ancestors and access to Self, 56
eight Cs of, defined, 52–55 (see also eight Cs)	eight Cs of, defined, 52–55 (see also eight Cs)	восемь C из определенных, 52–55 (см. также восемь C)	eight Cs of, defined, 52–55 (see also eight Cs)
grieved empty nester (case vignette), 57–60	grieved empty nester (case vignette), 57–60	скорбящее пустое гнездо (сценарий дела), 57–60	grieved empty nester (case vignette), 57–60
Journal Capture (exercise), 62	Journal Capture (exercise), 62	Захват журнала (упражнение), 62	Journal Capture (exercise), 62
Self-Energy, ancestors, and access to Self, 56	Self-Energy, ancestors, and access to Self, 56	Энергия собственного «Я», предки и доступ к «Я», 56 лет.	Self-Energy, ancestors, and access to Self, 56
Self-energy and emotion, 49–52	Self-energy and emotion, 49–52	Собственная энергия и эмоции, 49–52.	Self-energy and emotion, 49–52
Self-like parts, 55–56	Self-like parts, 55–56	Самоподобные части, 55–56.	Self-like parts, 55–56
Self Qualities Journal Questions (exercise), 62	Self Qualities Journal Questions (exercise), 62	Вопросы для дневника самокачеств (упражнение), 62	Self Qualities Journal Questions (exercise), 62
Self Qualities (meditation), 12, 61–62	Self Qualities (meditation), 12, 61–62	Самокачества (медитация), 12, 61–62.	Self Qualities (meditation), 12, 61–62
Self Qualities Practice & Awareness (exercise), 63	Self Qualities Practice & Awareness (exercise), 63	Практика и осознание собственных качеств (упражнение), 63	Self Qualities Practice & Awareness (exercise), 63
Self-to-part relationship, 75–88	Self-to-part relationship, 75–88	Отношения «себя-расставания», 75–88.	Self-to-part relationship, 75–88
author’s experience with, 75–78	author’s experience with, 75–78	опыт автора, 75–78	author’s experience with, 75–78
befriending for, 78–82	befriending for, 78–82	дружба, 78–82	befriending for, 78–82
Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87	Хрустальная пещера с предками (медитация), 85–87.	Crystal Cave with the Ancestors (meditation), 85–87
Deepening the Relationship (exercise), 88	Deepening the Relationship (exercise), 88	Углубление отношений (упражнение), 88	Deepening the Relationship (exercise), 88
Direct Access for, 82–83	Direct Access for, 82–83	Прямой доступ для, 82–83	Direct Access for, 82–83
fleshing out for, 82	fleshing out for, 82	конкретизация, 82	fleshing out for, 82
Journal Capture (exercise), 88	Journal Capture (exercise), 88	Захват журнала (упражнение), 88	Journal Capture (exercise), 88
Journal Prompts (exercise), 88	Journal Prompts (exercise), 88	Журнальные подсказки (упражнение), 88	Journal Prompts (exercise), 88
retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144	retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144	возвращение изгнанника (сценарий дела), 142–144	retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144
suicidal part (case vignette), 83–85	suicidal part (case vignette), 83–85	суицидальная часть (случай), 83–85	suicidal part (case vignette), 83–85
separation (unblending), 67–70, 136, 211	separation (unblending), 67–70, 136, 211	разделение (несмешение), 67–70, 136, 211	separation (unblending), 67–70, 136, 211
Sex Roles journal, 156	Sex Roles journal, 156	Журнал «Половые роли», 156.	Sex Roles journal, 156
sexual abuse	sexual abuse	сексуальное насилие	sexual abuse
firefighter example of, 29–31	firefighter example of, 29–31	пример пожарного, 29–31	firefighter example of, 29–31
Retrieving an Exile (case vignette), 142–144	Retrieving an Exile (case vignette), 142–144	Возвращение изгнанника (сценарий дела), 142–144.	Retrieving an Exile (case vignette), 142–144
“Shhhh” part example, 169–170, 183	“Shhhh” part example, 169–170, 183	Пример партии «Шшшш», 169–170, 183	“Shhhh” part example, 169–170, 183
The Strong Black Woman (Golden), 157	The Strong Black Woman (Golden), 157	Сильная негритянка (Золотая), 157	The Strong Black Woman (Golden), 157
Strong Black Woman legacy burden	Strong Black Woman legacy burden	Сильное бремя наследия чернокожей женщины	Strong Black Woman legacy burden
case vignette, 158–162	case vignette, 158–162	виньетка по делу, 158–162	case vignette, 158–162
defined, 156–158	defined, 156–158	определено, 156–158	defined, 156–158
suicidal thoughts	suicidal thoughts	суицидальные мысли	suicidal thoughts
protector parts and, 27–28	protector parts and, 27–28	части протектора и, 27–28	protector parts and, 27–28
suicidal part (case vignette), 83–85	suicidal part (case vignette), 83–85	суицидальная часть (случай), 83–85	suicidal part (case vignette), 83–85
Sullivan, Julia, 52	Sullivan, Julia, 52	Салливан, Джулия, 52 года.	Sullivan, Julia, 52
“Survive” and “Thrive” parts experience, 89–91, 93, 184	“Survive” and “Thrive” parts experience, 89–91, 93, 184	Опыт частей «Выжить» и «Процветать», 89–91, 93, 184.	“Survive” and “Thrive” parts experience, 89–91, 93, 184
Sweezy, Martha, 5, 40, 186–187	Sweezy, Martha, 5, 40, 186–187	Суизи, Марта, 5, 40, 186–187.	Sweezy, Martha, 5, 40, 186–187
T	T	Т	T
therapy. See also Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy	therapy. See also Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy	терапия. См. также Терапию внутренних семейных систем (IFS).	therapy. See also Internal Family Systems (IFS) Therapy
Black Therapists Rock (BTR), 2, 10–13	Black Therapists Rock (BTR), 2, 10–13	Черный терапевт-рок (BTR), 2, 10–13	Black Therapists Rock (BTR), 2, 10–13
Direct Access technique, 82–83	Direct Access technique, 82–83	Техника прямого доступа, 82–83.	Direct Access technique, 82–83
Self-leadership and, 20–22	Self-leadership and, 20–22	Самолидерство и, 20–22	Self-leadership and, 20–22
therapists/practitioners, IFS for, 21–22	therapists/practitioners, IFS for, 21–22	терапевты/практики, IFS для детей 21–22 лет	therapists/practitioners, IFS for, 21–22
30 Day Parts Check-In (exercise), 179–180	30 Day Parts Check-In (exercise), 179–180	30-дневная проверка запчастей (упражнение), 179–180	30 Day Parts Check-In (exercise), 179–180
touch, 68, 81	touch, 68, 81	прикосновение, 68, 81	touch, 68, 81
Trailblazer (meditation), 12, 178–179. See also integration	Trailblazer (meditation), 12, 178–179. See also integration	Первопроходец (медитация), 12, 178–179. См. также интеграцию	Trailblazer (meditation), 12, 178–179. See also integration
trauma in body, 105–116. See also burdens	trauma in body, 105–116. See also burdens	травма тела, 105–116. См. также обременения	trauma in body, 105–116. See also burdens
author’s experience with, 105–106	author’s experience with, 105–106	опыт автора, 105–106	author’s experience with, 105–106
exiles and the body, 108	exiles and the body, 108	изгнанники и тело, 108	exiles and the body, 108
Journal about Wisdom of Your Body (exercise), 115	Journal about Wisdom of Your Body (exercise), 115	Журнал о мудрости вашего тела (упражнение), 115	Journal about Wisdom of Your Body (exercise), 115
Journal Capture (exercise), 115	Journal Capture (exercise), 115	Захват журнала (упражнение), 115	Journal Capture (exercise), 115
Naming the Sensations (exercise), 116	Naming the Sensations (exercise), 116	Называя ощущения (упражнение), 116	Naming the Sensations (exercise), 116
nausea (case vignette), 110–112	nausea (case vignette), 110–112	тошнота (пример случая), 110–112	nausea (case vignette), 110–112
polarized parts and the body, 108–109	polarized parts and the body, 108–109	поляризованные части и тело, 108–109.	polarized parts and the body, 108–109
protectors and the body, 106–107	protectors and the body, 106–107	защитники и тело, 106–107.	protectors and the body, 106–107
Self and the body, 109–110	Self and the body, 109–110	Я и тело, 109–110.	Self and the body, 109–110
Waterfall (meditation), 113–114	Waterfall (meditation), 113–114	Водопад (медитация), 113–114.	Waterfall (meditation), 113–114
Where Parts Live in Your Body (exercise), 116	Where Parts Live in Your Body (exercise), 116	Где в вашем теле живут части (упражнение), 116	Where Parts Live in Your Body (exercise), 116
U	U	ты	U
unblending (separation), 67–70, 136, 211	unblending (separation), 67–70, 136, 211	несмешение (разделение), 67–70, 136, 211	unblending (separation), 67–70, 136, 211
unburdening, 133–146. See also integration	unburdening, 133–146. See also integration	разгрузка, 133–146. См. также интеграцию	unburdening, 133–146. See also integration
author’s experience with, 133–135	author’s experience with, 133–135	опыт автора, 133–135	author’s experience with, 133–135
burdens as exiled parts, 135–136	burdens as exiled parts, 135–136	бремя изгнанных частей, 135–136	burdens as exiled parts, 135–136
defined, 140–141, 211	defined, 140–141, 211	определено, 140–141, 211	defined, 140–141, 211
do-overs for, 138–139	do-overs for, 138–139	переделки, 138–139	do-overs for, 138–139
Elemental Healing (meditation), 144–146	Elemental Healing (meditation), 144–146	Элементальное исцеление (медитация), 144–146.	Elemental Healing (meditation), 144–146
expectations following, 195–201	expectations following, 195–201	ожидания следующие, 195–201	expectations following, 195–201
invitation for, 141–142	invitation for, 141–142	приглашение, 141–142	invitation for, 141–142
Journal Capture (exercise), 146	Journal Capture (exercise), 146	Захват журнала (упражнение), 146	Journal Capture (exercise), 146
Journal Prompts (exercise), 146	Journal Prompts (exercise), 146	Журнальные подсказки (упражнение), 146	Journal Prompts (exercise), 146
retrieval by Self for, 139–140	retrieval by Self for, 139–140	поиск Селфом, 139–140	retrieval by Self for, 139–140
retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144	retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144	возвращение изгнанника (сценарий дела), 142–144	retrieving an exile (case vignette), 142–144
witnessing and, 136–138	witnessing and, 136–138	свидетельствование и, 136–138	witnessing and, 136–138
Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167	Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167	Понимание бремени наследия (упражнение), 166–167	Understanding Legacy Burden (exercise), 166–167
Unwanted part (case vignette), 41–44	Unwanted part (case vignette), 41–44	Нежелательная часть (сценарий случая), 41–44.	Unwanted part (case vignette), 41–44
updating, 173, 211	updating, 173, 211	обновление, 173, 211	updating, 173, 211
U-turn	U-turn	разворот	U-turn
benefits of, 198–199	benefits of, 198–199	преимущества, 198–199	benefits of, 198–199
Create a U-Turn Statement (exercise), 194	Create a U-Turn Statement (exercise), 194	Создайте заявление о развороте (упражнение), 194	Create a U-Turn Statement (exercise), 194
defined, 186, 211	defined, 186, 211	определено, 186, 211	defined, 186, 211
V	V	В	V
vulnerability, 37–47	vulnerability, 37–47	уязвимость, 37–47	vulnerability, 37–47
author’s experience (“Cry Baby”), 37–38, 40	author’s experience (“Cry Baby”), 37–38, 40	авторский опыт («Плакса»), 37–38, 40	author’s experience (“Cry Baby”), 37–38, 40
burdens and, 39–40 (see also burdens)	burdens and, 39–40 (see also burdens)	отягощения и, 39–40 (см. также отягощения)	burdens and, 39–40 (see also burdens)
Deepen the Connection (exercise), 47	Deepen the Connection (exercise), 47	Углубление связи (упражнение), 47	Deepen the Connection (exercise), 47
exiling (case vignette), 41–44	exiling (case vignette), 41–44	ссылка (сценарий дела), 41–44	exiling (case vignette), 41–44
exiling concept, overview, 38–39 (see also exiles)	exiling concept, overview, 38–39 (see also exiles)	концепция ссылки, обзор, 38–39 (см. также ссылки)	exiling concept, overview, 38–39 (see also exiles)
Journal Capture (exercise), 46	Journal Capture (exercise), 46	Захват журнала (упражнение), 46	Journal Capture (exercise), 46
Journal Prompts (exercise), 46–47	Journal Prompts (exercise), 46–47	Подсказки для журнала (упражнение), 46–47.	Journal Prompts (exercise), 46–47
The Meadow (meditation), 45–46	The Meadow (meditation), 45–46	Луг (медитация), 45–46.	The Meadow (meditation), 45–46
polarization and, 99	polarization and, 99	поляризация и, 99	polarization and, 99
protector parts’ roles for, 107	protector parts’ roles for, 107	роли защитника, 107	protector parts’ roles for, 107
witnessing and, 40–41 (see also witnessing)	witnessing and, 40–41 (see also witnessing)	свидетельствование и, 40–41 (см. также свидетельствование)	witnessing and, 40–41 (see also witnessing)
W	W	Вт	W
Waterfall (meditation), 113–114. See also trauma in body	Waterfall (meditation), 113–114. See also trauma in body	Водопад (медитация), 113–114. См. также травму тела.	Waterfall (meditation), 113–114. See also trauma in body
The Weary One Journaling Questions (exercise), 130	The Weary One Journaling Questions (exercise), 130	Вопросы для ведения журнала «Усталый» (упражнение), 130	The Weary One Journaling Questions (exercise), 130
The Weary One (meditation), 128–129. See also exhausted parts	The Weary One (meditation), 128–129. See also exhausted parts	Утомленный (медитация), 128–129. См. также изношенные детали	The Weary One (meditation), 128–129. See also exhausted parts
Where Parts Live in Your Body (exercise), 116	Where Parts Live in Your Body (exercise), 116	Где в вашем теле живут части (упражнение), 116	Where Parts Live in Your Body (exercise), 116
White, Jamari, 6, 8–9	White, Jamari, 6, 8–9	Уайт, Джамари, 6, 8–9	White, Jamari, 6, 8–9
witnessing, 40–41, 136–138, 211	witnessing, 40–41, 136–138, 211	свидетельствование, 40–41, 136–138, 211.	witnessing, 40–41, 136–138, 211
Writing Clan, 12, 201	Writing Clan, 12, 201	Писающий клан, 12, 201	Writing Clan, 12, 201
Y	Y	Да	Y
Young, Deran, 10. See also Black Therapists Rock	Young, Deran, 10. See also Black Therapists Rock	Янг, Деран, 10 лет. См. также «Рок черных терапевтов».	Young, Deran, 10. See also Black Therapists Rock
young and vulnerable parts. See vulnerability	young and vulnerable parts. See vulnerability	молодые и уязвимые части. Посмотреть уязвимость	young and vulnerable parts. See vulnerability
Acknowledgments	Acknowledgments	Благодарности	Acknowledgments
The most important person I want to thank is my husband, Ernest Floyd, for taking this amazing journey with me. I would have been lost without his tech-savvy support—ensuring adequate Internet speed, recommending and updating various applications, filming and editing my marketing video, supporting my vision, and loving my many parts who showed up along the way. He gave me the space I required to write and made sure we had plenty of fun, lightheartedness, and adventure too.	The most important person I want to thank is my husband, Ernest Floyd, for taking this amazing journey with me. I would have been lost without his tech-savvy support—ensuring adequate Internet speed, recommending and updating various applications, filming and editing my marketing video, supporting my vision, and loving my many parts who showed up along the way. He gave me the space I required to write and made sure we had plenty of fun, lightheartedness, and adventure too.	Самый важный человек, которого я хочу поблагодарить, — это мой муж Эрнест Флойд за то, что он отправился со мной в это удивительное путешествие. Я был бы потерян без его технически подкованной поддержки — обеспечения адекватной скорости Интернета, рекомендаций и обновлений различных приложений, съемок и редактирования моего маркетингового видео, поддержки моего видения и любви ко многим моим частям, которые появлялись на этом пути. Он дал мне необходимое пространство для написания и позаботился о том, чтобы мы получили массу удовольствия, беззаботности и приключений.	The most important person I want to thank is my husband, Ernest Floyd, for taking this amazing journey with me. I would have been lost without his tech-savvy support—ensuring adequate Internet speed, recommending and updating various applications, filming and editing my marketing video, supporting my vision, and loving my many parts who showed up along the way. He gave me the space I required to write and made sure we had plenty of fun, lightheartedness, and adventure too.
Thank you to Dr. Richard Schwartz for creating the IFS model and generously sharing it with the world, even in times of challenge and doubt. I am grateful to Dr. Schwartz for encouraging my desire to become an IFS trainer and author and supporting my growth, through his teachings and by working with my system and parts. I also appreciate his words of encouragement to deepen my relationships with my ancestors.	Thank you to Dr. Richard Schwartz for creating the IFS model and generously sharing it with the world, even in times of challenge and doubt. I am grateful to Dr. Schwartz for encouraging my desire to become an IFS trainer and author and supporting my growth, through his teachings and by working with my system and parts. I also appreciate his words of encouragement to deepen my relationships with my ancestors.	Спасибо доктору Ричарду Шварцу за то, что он создал модель IFS и щедро поделился ею с миром, даже во времена трудностей и сомнений. Я благодарен доктору Шварцу за то, что он поддержал мое желание стать тренером и автором IFS и поддержал мой рост посредством его учений и работы с моей системой и ее частями. Я также ценю его слова поддержки, направленные на углубление моих отношений с моими предками.	Thank you to Dr. Richard Schwartz for creating the IFS model and generously sharing it with the world, even in times of challenge and doubt. I am grateful to Dr. Schwartz for encouraging my desire to become an IFS trainer and author and supporting my growth, through his teachings and by working with my system and parts. I also appreciate his words of encouragement to deepen my relationships with my ancestors.
To Sarah Stewart, Psy.D., my IFS therapist, who has been my rock through this process. She has met and worked with many of my parts shared in this book and has supported my healing and Self-leadership journey. Her support has been invaluable.	To Sarah Stewart, Psy.D., my IFS therapist, who has been my rock through this process. She has met and worked with many of my parts shared in this book and has supported my healing and Self-leadership journey. Her support has been invaluable.	Саре Стюарт, доктору психологии, моему терапевту по IFS, которая была моей опорой в этом процессе. Она встречалась и работала со многими из моих частей, описанных в этой книге, и поддерживала мой путь к исцелению и самолидерству. Ее поддержка была неоценима.	To Sarah Stewart, Psy.D., my IFS therapist, who has been my rock through this process. She has met and worked with many of my parts shared in this book and has supported my healing and Self-leadership journey. Her support has been invaluable.
I want to acknowledge three IFS senior lead trainers who guided, taught, and supported my process: Chris Burris, LMFT; Pamela Krause, LCSW; and Ann Sinko, LMFT.	I want to acknowledge three IFS senior lead trainers who guided, taught, and supported my process: Chris Burris, LMFT; Pamela Krause, LCSW; and Ann Sinko, LMFT.	Я хочу выразить признательность трем старшим ведущим тренерам IFS, которые направляли, обучали и поддерживали мой процесс: Крису Беррису, LMFT; Памела Краузе, LCSW; и Энн Синко, LMFT.	I want to acknowledge three IFS senior lead trainers who guided, taught, and supported my process: Chris Burris, LMFT; Pamela Krause, LCSW; and Ann Sinko, LMFT.
Chris Burris greatly impacted my development as an IFS solo lead trainer. He mentored me in such a generous fashion, sharing his knowledge and experience while highlighting my strengths and providing tools and suggestions for my growing edges. From the beginning, Chris supported my idea of writing a book about IFS and including ancestor-inspired meditations. He was invaluable in my understanding and application of the model and translating that knowledge into this book.	Chris Burris greatly impacted my development as an IFS solo lead trainer. He mentored me in such a generous fashion, sharing his knowledge and experience while highlighting my strengths and providing tools and suggestions for my growing edges. From the beginning, Chris supported my idea of writing a book about IFS and including ancestor-inspired meditations. He was invaluable in my understanding and application of the model and translating that knowledge into this book.	Крис Беррис сильно повлиял на мое развитие как индивидуального ведущего тренера IFS. Он щедро наставлял меня, делясь своими знаниями и опытом, подчеркивая мои сильные стороны и предоставляя инструменты и предложения для моего роста. С самого начала Крис поддержал мою идею написать книгу об IFS и включить в нее медитации, вдохновленные предками. Он оказал неоценимую помощь в моем понимании и применении модели, а также в воплощении этих знаний в этой книге.	Chris Burris greatly impacted my development as an IFS solo lead trainer. He mentored me in such a generous fashion, sharing his knowledge and experience while highlighting my strengths and providing tools and suggestions for my growing edges. From the beginning, Chris supported my idea of writing a book about IFS and including ancestor-inspired meditations. He was invaluable in my understanding and application of the model and translating that knowledge into this book.
Pam Krause is a gem of a teacher and friend. During the mentoring process and beyond, I have been so fortunate to benefit from her 20-plus years of experience. Pam helped me truly embrace the qualities of Self that I witnessed her exemplify—especially her unmatched gift of speaking for her parts. Pam’s willingness to share her vulnerability gave my parts not only permission but a road map for expressing themselves. Under Pam’s guidance I learned the powerful healing effect of Self-energy.	Pam Krause is a gem of a teacher and friend. During the mentoring process and beyond, I have been so fortunate to benefit from her 20-plus years of experience. Pam helped me truly embrace the qualities of Self that I witnessed her exemplify—especially her unmatched gift of speaking for her parts. Pam’s willingness to share her vulnerability gave my parts not only permission but a road map for expressing themselves. Under Pam’s guidance I learned the powerful healing effect of Self-energy.	Пэм Краузе – настоящий учитель и друг. В процессе наставничества и за его пределами мне посчастливилось воспользоваться ее более чем 20-летним опытом. Пэм помогла мне по-настоящему осознать те качества личности, которые, как я был свидетелем, она демонстрировала, особенно ее непревзойденный дар говорить от своего имени. Готовность Пэм поделиться своей уязвимостью дала моим частям не только разрешение, но и дорожную карту для самовыражения. Под руководством Пэм я узнал мощный целебный эффект Самоэнергии.	Pam Krause is a gem of a teacher and friend. During the mentoring process and beyond, I have been so fortunate to benefit from her 20-plus years of experience. Pam helped me truly embrace the qualities of Self that I witnessed her exemplify—especially her unmatched gift of speaking for her parts. Pam’s willingness to share her vulnerability gave my parts not only permission but a road map for expressing themselves. Under Pam’s guidance I learned the powerful healing effect of Self-energy.
I am grateful to Ann Sinko for her contribution to expanding my understanding of legacy burdens and the gift of ancestor work with IFS. As one of my mentors, Ann helped me learn the nuances of the model. Once I understood the model, she helped me appreciate its intricacies, which broadened and deepened my experience with IFS.	I am grateful to Ann Sinko for her contribution to expanding my understanding of legacy burdens and the gift of ancestor work with IFS. As one of my mentors, Ann helped me learn the nuances of the model. Once I understood the model, she helped me appreciate its intricacies, which broadened and deepened my experience with IFS.	Я благодарен Энн Синко за ее вклад в расширение моего понимания бремени наследия и дар работы предков с IFS. Будучи одним из моих наставников, Анна помогла мне изучить нюансы модели. Как только я понял модель, она помогла мне оценить ее тонкости, что расширило и углубило мой опыт работы с IFS.	I am grateful to Ann Sinko for her contribution to expanding my understanding of legacy burdens and the gift of ancestor work with IFS. As one of my mentors, Ann helped me learn the nuances of the model. Once I understood the model, she helped me appreciate its intricacies, which broadened and deepened my experience with IFS.
I want to thank the entire Hay House publishing team who assisted in bringing this book forth. I am most grateful to Anne Barthel, Executive Editor, the woman who journeyed the entire distance with me. As a new writer, Anne was exactly the editor I needed, because she made sure I understood the process at every single step. Most importantly, she had a way of delivering corrective feedback that didn’t activate my critical, perfectionist parts. I am immensely grateful for the many thoughtful suggestions she made to improve my writing. I learned from Anne that writers write and editors edit. I’m grateful for our partnership and how beautifully she edited my work.	I want to thank the entire Hay House publishing team who assisted in bringing this book forth. I am most grateful to Anne Barthel, Executive Editor, the woman who journeyed the entire distance with me. As a new writer, Anne was exactly the editor I needed, because she made sure I understood the process at every single step. Most importantly, she had a way of delivering corrective feedback that didn’t activate my critical, perfectionist parts. I am immensely grateful for the many thoughtful suggestions she made to improve my writing. I learned from Anne that writers write and editors edit. I’m grateful for our partnership and how beautifully she edited my work.	Я хочу поблагодарить всю издательскую команду Hay House, которая помогла выпустить эту книгу. Я очень благодарен Анне Бартель, исполнительному редактору, женщине, которая проделала со мной весь путь. Как новый писатель, Энн была именно тем редактором, который мне был нужен, потому что она следила за тем, чтобы я понимал процесс на каждом этапе. Самое главное, у нее был способ давать корректирующую обратную связь, которая не активизировала мои критические, перфекционистские стороны. Я безмерно благодарен ей за множество вдумчивых предложений по улучшению моего письма. От Анны я узнала, что писатели пишут, а редакторы редактируют. Я благодарен за наше сотрудничество и за то, как прекрасно она отредактировала мою работу.	I want to thank the entire Hay House publishing team who assisted in bringing this book forth. I am most grateful to Anne Barthel, Executive Editor, the woman who journeyed the entire distance with me. As a new writer, Anne was exactly the editor I needed, because she made sure I understood the process at every single step. Most importantly, she had a way of delivering corrective feedback that didn’t activate my critical, perfectionist parts. I am immensely grateful for the many thoughtful suggestions she made to improve my writing. I learned from Anne that writers write and editors edit. I’m grateful for our partnership and how beautifully she edited my work.
Thank you, Devon Glenn, for improving the readability of my work with your copyediting. Simple changes made a world of difference. I’m glad to be the beneficiary of your talent.	Thank you, Devon Glenn, for improving the readability of my work with your copyediting. Simple changes made a world of difference. I’m glad to be the beneficiary of your talent.	Спасибо, Девон Гленн, за улучшение читабельности моей работы благодаря вашему редактированию. Простые изменения изменили мир. Я рад быть бенефициаром вашего таланта.	Thank you, Devon Glenn, for improving the readability of my work with your copyediting. Simple changes made a world of difference. I’m glad to be the beneficiary of your talent.
Monica O’Connor, who assisted Anne, asked great questions that expanded my ideas for the book and clarified concepts for readers new to IFS.	Monica O’Connor, who assisted Anne, asked great questions that expanded my ideas for the book and clarified concepts for readers new to IFS.	Моника О’Коннор, которая помогала Анне, задала замечательные вопросы, которые расширили мои идеи относительно книги и разъяснили концепции для читателей, впервые знакомых с IFS.	Monica O’Connor, who assisted Anne, asked great questions that expanded my ideas for the book and clarified concepts for readers new to IFS.
I am grateful to Allison Janice, senior acquisitions editor, who first reviewed my meditation audio proposal. When we met, she simply asked if I’d be open to writing a book and expanding on the audio idea. Thank you, Allison, for asking the question that honored my ancestors’ intentions and opened the way for Listening When Parts Speak.	I am grateful to Allison Janice, senior acquisitions editor, who first reviewed my meditation audio proposal. When we met, she simply asked if I’d be open to writing a book and expanding on the audio idea. Thank you, Allison, for asking the question that honored my ancestors’ intentions and opened the way for Listening When Parts Speak.	Я благодарен Эллисон Дженис, старшему редактору отдела закупок, которая первой рассмотрела мое предложение по аудиомедитации. Когда мы встретились, она просто спросила, готов ли я написать книгу и расширить идею аудио. Спасибо, Эллисон, за вопрос, который отдал дань уважения намерениям моих предков и открыл путь к способности «Слушать, когда говорят части».	I am grateful to Allison Janice, senior acquisitions editor, who first reviewed my meditation audio proposal. When we met, she simply asked if I’d be open to writing a book and expanding on the audio idea. Thank you, Allison, for asking the question that honored my ancestors’ intentions and opened the way for Listening When Parts Speak.
About the Author	About the Author	Об авторе	About the Author
TAMALA FLOYD, LCSW, is a psychotherapist, IFS lead trainer, consultant, author, and speaker with over 25 years of experience. She received a master’s degree in social work from the University of Southern California and an undergraduate degree in psychology from California State University–Long Beach. She has taught at the University of Phoenix and the University of Southern California in human services and social work. Her work focuses on women’s trauma, mothering, and relationship issues, helping women identify and heal emotional wounds that impede their success and coaching them in achieving fulfilling life goals.	TAMALA FLOYD, LCSW, is a psychotherapist, IFS lead trainer, consultant, author, and speaker with over 25 years of experience. She received a master’s degree in social work from the University of Southern California and an undergraduate degree in psychology from California State University–Long Beach. She has taught at the University of Phoenix and the University of Southern California in human services and social work. Her work focuses on women’s trauma, mothering, and relationship issues, helping women identify and heal emotional wounds that impede their success and coaching them in achieving fulfilling life goals.	ТАМАЛА ФЛОЙД, LCSW, — психотерапевт, ведущий тренер IFS, консультант, автор и оратор с более чем 25-летним опытом. Она получила степень магистра социальной работы в Университете Южной Калифорнии и степень бакалавра психологии в Университете штата Калифорния в Лонг-Бич. Она преподавала в Университете Финикса и Университете Южной Калифорнии в области социальных услуг и социальной работы. Ее работа сосредоточена на женских травмах, материнстве и проблемах взаимоотношений, помогая женщинам выявить и залечить эмоциональные раны, которые мешают их успеху, и обучает их достижению жизненных целей.	TAMALA FLOYD, LCSW, is a psychotherapist, IFS lead trainer, consultant, author, and speaker with over 25 years of experience. She received a master’s degree in social work from the University of Southern California and an undergraduate degree in psychology from California State University–Long Beach. She has taught at the University of Phoenix and the University of Southern California in human services and social work. Her work focuses on women’s trauma, mothering, and relationship issues, helping women identify and heal emotional wounds that impede their success and coaching them in achieving fulfilling life goals.
tamalafloyd.com	tamalafloyd.com	tamalafloyd.com	tamalafloyd.com
The guided meditations in Listening When Parts Speak are available as free audio recordings. To access the recordings, please visit www.hayhouse.com/download and enter the Product ID 5654 and the Download Code audio.	The guided meditations in Listening When Parts Speak are available as free audio recordings. To access the recordings, please visit www.hayhouse.com/download and enter the Product ID 5654 and the Download Code audio.	Управляемые медитации в разделе «Слушай, когда говорят части» доступны в виде бесплатных аудиозаписей. Чтобы получить доступ к записям, посетите сайт www.hayhouse.com/download и введите идентификатор продукта 5654 и код загрузки аудио.	The guided meditations in Listening When Parts Speak are available as free audio recordings. To access the recordings, please visit www.hayhouse.com/download and enter the Product ID 5654 and the Download Code audio.
Please listen to the meditations at a time when you can relax and when you won’t be interrupted. Never listen to them while driving or engaging in activities where you need to be alert.	Please listen to the meditations at a time when you can relax and when you won’t be interrupted. Never listen to them while driving or engaging in activities where you need to be alert.	Пожалуйста, слушайте медитации в то время, когда вы можете расслабиться и вас никто не отвлекает. Никогда не слушайте их во время вождения или занятий деятельностью, где вам необходимо быть начеку.	Please listen to the meditations at a time when you can relax and when you won’t be interrupted. Never listen to them while driving or engaging in activities where you need to be alert.
If you need assistance in accessing the recordings, please contact Hay House Customer Care by phone—US (800) 654-5126 or INTL CC+(760) 431-7695—or visit www.hayhouse.com/contact.	If you need assistance in accessing the recordings, please contact Hay House Customer Care by phone—US (800) 654-5126 or INTL CC+(760) 431-7695—or visit www.hayhouse.com/contact.	Если вам нужна помощь в доступе к записям, обратитесь в службу поддержки клиентов Hay House по телефону (800) 654-5126 или INTL CC+(760) 431-7695 или посетите сайт www.hayhouse.com/contact.	If you need assistance in accessing the recordings, please contact Hay House Customer Care by phone—US (800) 654-5126 or INTL CC+(760) 431-7695—or visit www.hayhouse.com/contact.
Get unlimited access to the entire Hay House audio library!	Get unlimited access to the entire Hay House audio library!	Получите неограниченный доступ ко всей аудиотеке Hay House!	Get unlimited access to the entire Hay House audio library!
• 500+ inspiring and life-changing audiobooks	• 500+ inspiring and life-changing audiobooks	• Более 500 вдохновляющих и меняющих жизнь аудиокниг	• 500+ inspiring and life-changing audiobooks
• 200+ ad-free guided meditations for sleep, healing, relaxation, spiritual connection, and more	• 200+ ad-free guided meditations for sleep, healing, relaxation, spiritual connection, and more	• Более 200 медитаций без рекламы для сна, исцеления, релаксации, духовной связи и многого другого.	• 200+ ad-free guided meditations for sleep, healing, relaxation, spiritual connection, and more
• Hundreds of audios under 20 minutes to easily fit into your day	• Hundreds of audios under 20 minutes to easily fit into your day	• Сотни аудиозаписей продолжительностью менее 20 минут, которые легко впишутся в ваш день.	• Hundreds of audios under 20 minutes to easily fit into your day
• Exclusive content only for subscribers	• Exclusive content only for subscribers	• Эксклюзивный контент только для подписчиков.	• Exclusive content only for subscribers
• No credits, no limits	• No credits, no limits	• Никаких кредитов, никаких ограничений	• No credits, no limits
TRY FOR FREE! >>	TRY FOR FREE! >>	ПОПРОБУЙТЕ БЕСПЛАТНО! >>	TRY FOR FREE! >>
Where is Your Heart Leading You? —	Where is Your Heart Leading You? —	Куда ведет вас ваше сердце? —	Where is Your Heart Leading You? —
You were born with unique, undeniable gifts. In your quietest moments, you can feel them yearning to awaken.	You were born with unique, undeniable gifts. In your quietest moments, you can feel them yearning to awaken.	Вы родились с уникальными, неоспоримыми дарами. В самые тихие моменты вы можете почувствовать, как они жаждут пробуждения.	You were born with unique, undeniable gifts. In your quietest moments, you can feel them yearning to awaken.
You long to express them and show the world what you’re truly capable of.	You long to express them and show the world what you’re truly capable of.	Вы жаждете выразить их и показать миру, на что вы действительно способны.	You long to express them and show the world what you’re truly capable of.
By discovering more about yourself, you’ll naturally understand how to fulfill the wonderful potential you know lives deep within you.	By discovering more about yourself, you’ll naturally understand how to fulfill the wonderful potential you know lives deep within you.	Узнав больше о себе, вы, естественно, поймете, как реализовать тот замечательный потенциал, который, как вы знаете, живет глубоко внутри вас.	By discovering more about yourself, you’ll naturally understand how to fulfill the wonderful potential you know lives deep within you.
This self-discovery quiz will help guide you on your next steps to sharing your gifts with the world.	This self-discovery quiz will help guide you on your next steps to sharing your gifts with the world.	Этот тест для самопознания поможет вам сделать следующие шаги, чтобы поделиться своими дарами с миром.	This self-discovery quiz will help guide you on your next steps to sharing your gifts with the world.
TAKE THE FREE QUIZ NOW >>	TAKE THE FREE QUIZ NOW >>	ПРОЙДИТЕ БЕСПЛАТНЫЙ ТЕСТ СЕЙЧАС >>	TAKE THE FREE QUIZ NOW >>
Hay House Titles of Related Interest	Hay House Titles of Related Interest	Интересные названия Hay House	Hay House Titles of Related Interest
YOU CAN HEAL YOUR LIFE, the movie,	YOU CAN HEAL YOUR LIFE, the movie,	ТЫ МОЖЕШЬ ИСЦЕЛИТЬ СВОЮ ЖИЗНЬ, фильм	YOU CAN HEAL YOUR LIFE, the movie,
starring Louise Hay & Friends	starring Louise Hay & Friends	в главных ролях: Луиза Хэй и друзья	starring Louise Hay & Friends
(available as an online streaming video)	(available as an online streaming video)	(доступно в виде потокового онлайн-видео)	(available as an online streaming video)
www.hayhouse.com/louise-movie	www.hayhouse.com/louise-movie	www.hayhouse.com/louise-movie	www.hayhouse.com/louise-movie
THE SHIFT, the movie,	THE SHIFT, the movie,	СМЕНА, фильм	THE SHIFT, the movie,
starring Dr. Wayne W. Dyer	starring Dr. Wayne W. Dyer	в главной роли доктор Уэйн В. Дайер	starring Dr. Wayne W. Dyer
(available as an online streaming video)	(available as an online streaming video)	(доступно в виде потокового онлайн-видео)	(available as an online streaming video)
www.hayhouse.com/the-shift-movie	www.hayhouse.com/the-shift-movie	www.hayhouse.com/the-shift-movie	www.hayhouse.com/the-shift-movie
***	***	***	***
ANCESTORS SAID: 365 Introspections for Emotional Healing	ANCESTORS SAID: 365 Introspections for Emotional Healing	ПРЕДКИ ГОВОРИЛИ: 365 самоанализов для эмоционального исцеления	ANCESTORS SAID: 365 Introspections for Emotional Healing
by Ehime Ora	by Ehime Ora	от Эхиме Ора	by Ehime Ora
CONNECTED FATES, SEPARATE DESTINIES: Using Family	CONNECTED FATES, SEPARATE DESTINIES: Using Family	СВЯЗАННЫЕ СУДЬБЫ, РАЗНЫЕ СУДЬБЫ: Использование семьи	CONNECTED FATES, SEPARATE DESTINIES: Using Family
Constellations Therapy to Recover from Inherited Stories and	Constellations Therapy to Recover from Inherited Stories and	Терапия расстановок для восстановления после унаследованных историй и	Constellations Therapy to Recover from Inherited Stories and
Trauma by Marine Sélénée	Trauma by Marine Sélénée	«Травма» Марин Селене	Trauma by Marine Sélénée
HAPPY DAYS: The Guided Path from Trauma to Profound Freedom	HAPPY DAYS: The Guided Path from Trauma to Profound Freedom	СЧАСТЛИВЫЕ ДНИ: Путь от травмы к глубокой свободе	HAPPY DAYS: The Guided Path from Trauma to Profound Freedom
and Inner Peace by Gabrielle Bernstein	and Inner Peace by Gabrielle Bernstein	и внутренний мир Габриэль Бернштейн	and Inner Peace by Gabrielle Bernstein
TRANSFORMING THE MOTHER WOUND: Sacred Practices for	TRANSFORMING THE MOTHER WOUND: Sacred Practices for	ТРАНСФОРМАЦИЯ МАТЕРИНСКОЙ РАНЫ: Сакральные практики для	TRANSFORMING THE MOTHER WOUND: Sacred Practices for
Healing Your Inner Wise Woman through Ritual and Grounded	Healing Your Inner Wise Woman through Ritual and Grounded	Исцеление вашей внутренней мудрой женщины с помощью ритуалов и заземления	Healing Your Inner Wise Woman through Ritual and Grounded
Spirituality by Monika Carless	Spirituality by Monika Carless	Духовность Моники Карлесс	Spirituality by Monika Carless
YOU’RE GOING TO BE OKAY: 16 Lessons on Healing	YOU’RE GOING TO BE OKAY: 16 Lessons on Healing	С ВАМИ БУДЕТ В порядке: 16 уроков исцеления	YOU’RE GOING TO BE OKAY: 16 Lessons on Healing
After Trauma by Madeline Popelka	After Trauma by Madeline Popelka	После травмы Мэдлин Попелка	After Trauma by Madeline Popelka
All of the above are available at your local bookstore,	All of the above are available at your local bookstore,	Все вышеперечисленное можно приобрести в местном книжном магазине.	All of the above are available at your local bookstore,
or may be ordered by contacting Hay House (see next page).	or may be ordered by contacting Hay House (see next page).	или его можно заказать, связавшись с Hay House (см. следующую страницу).	or may be ordered by contacting Hay House (see next page).
***	***	***	***
We hope you enjoyed this Hay House book. If you’d like to receive our online catalog featuring additional information on Hay House books and products, or if you’d like to find out more about the Hay Foundation, please contact:	We hope you enjoyed this Hay House book. If you’d like to receive our online catalog featuring additional information on Hay House books and products, or if you’d like to find out more about the Hay Foundation, please contact:	Мы надеемся, что вам понравилась эта книга Hay House. Если вы хотите получить наш онлайн-каталог с дополнительной информацией о книгах и продукции Hay House или узнать больше о Hay Foundation, свяжитесь с:	We hope you enjoyed this Hay House book. If you’d like to receive our online catalog featuring additional information on Hay House books and products, or if you’d like to find out more about the Hay Foundation, please contact:
Hay House LLC, P.O. Box 5100, Carlsbad, CA 92018-5100	Hay House LLC, P.O. Box 5100, Carlsbad, CA 92018-5100	ООО «Хей Хаус», п.о. Box 5100, Карловы Вары, Калифорния 92018-5100	Hay House LLC, P.O. Box 5100, Carlsbad, CA 92018-5100
(760) 431-7695 or (800) 654-5126	(760) 431-7695 or (800) 654-5126	(760) 431-7695 или (800) 654-5126	(760) 431-7695 or (800) 654-5126
www.hayhouse.com® • www.hayfoundation.org	www.hayhouse.com® • www.hayfoundation.org	www.hayhouse.com® • www.hayfoundation.org	www.hayhouse.com® • www.hayfoundation.org
——	——	——	——
Published in Australia by:	Published in Australia by:	Опубликовано в Австралии:	Published in Australia by:
Hay House Australia Publishing Pty Ltd	Hay House Australia Publishing Pty Ltd	Hay House Australia Publishing Pty Ltd.	Hay House Australia Publishing Pty Ltd
18/36 Ralph St., Alexandria NSW 2015	18/36 Ralph St., Alexandria NSW 2015	Ральф Стрит, 18/36, Александрия, Новый Южный Уэльс, 2015 г.	18/36 Ralph St., Alexandria NSW 2015
Phone: +61 (02) 9669 4299	Phone: +61 (02) 9669 4299	Телефон: +61 (02) 9669 4299	Phone: +61 (02) 9669 4299
www.hayhouse.com.au	www.hayhouse.com.au	www.hayhouse.com.au	www.hayhouse.com.au
Published in the United Kingdom by:	Published in the United Kingdom by:	Опубликовано в Великобритании:	Published in the United Kingdom by:
Hay House UK Ltd	Hay House UK Ltd	Хэй Хаус ЮК Лтд.	Hay House UK Ltd
1st Floor, Crawford Corner,	1st Floor, Crawford Corner,	1-й этаж, Кроуфорд Корнер,	1st Floor, Crawford Corner,
91-93 Baker Street, London W1U 6QQ	91-93 Baker Street, London W1U 6QQ	Бейкер-стрит, 91-93, Лондон W1U 6QQ	91-93 Baker Street, London W1U 6QQ
Phone: +44 (0) 203 927 7290	Phone: +44 (0) 203 927 7290	Телефон: +44 (0) 203 927 7290	Phone: +44 (0) 203 927 7290
www.hayhouse.co.uk	www.hayhouse.co.uk	www.hayhouse.co.uk	www.hayhouse.co.uk
Published in India by:	Published in India by:	Опубликовано в Индии:	Published in India by:
Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd	Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd	Hay House Publishers (Индия) Pvt Ltd.	Hay House Publishers (India) Pvt Ltd
Muskaan Complex, Plot No. 3,	Muskaan Complex, Plot No. 3,	Комплекс Мускаан, участок №3,	Muskaan Complex, Plot No. 3,
B-2, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110 070	B-2, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110 070	B-2, Васант Кундж, Нью-Дели 110 070	B-2, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 110 070
Phone: +91 11 41761620	Phone: +91 11 41761620	Телефон: +91 11 41761620	Phone: +91 11 41761620
www.hayhouse.co.in	www.hayhouse.co.in	www.hayhouse.co.in	www.hayhouse.co.in
——	——	——	——
Let Your Soul Grow	Let Your Soul Grow	Пусть ваша душа растет	Let Your Soul Grow
Experience life-changing transformation—one video at a time—with guidance from the world’s leading experts.	Experience life-changing transformation—one video at a time—with guidance from the world’s leading experts.	Испытайте трансформацию, меняющую жизнь — по одному видео — под руководством ведущих мировых экспертов.	Experience life-changing transformation—one video at a time—with guidance from the world’s leading experts.
www.healyourlifeplus.com	www.healyourlifeplus.com	www.healyourlifeplus.com	www.healyourlifeplus.com